The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Prophet
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Prophet


Author: Kahlil Gibran

Release date: January 1, 2019 [eBook #58585]
                Most recently updated: December 23, 2021

Language: English



*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PROPHET ***



THE PROPHET

By Kahlil Gibran

New York: Alfred A. Knopf

1923

_The Twelve Illustrations In This Volume
Are Reproduced From Original Drawings By
The Author_




“His power came from some great reservoir
of spiritual life else it could not have
been so universal and so potent, but the
majesty and beauty of the language with
which he clothed it were all his own?”

--Claude Bragdon


THE BOOKS OF KAHLIL GIBRAN

The Madman. 1918 Twenty Drawings. 1919
The Forerunner. 1920 The Prophet. 1923
Sand and Foam. 1926 Jesus the Son of
Man. 1928 The Forth Gods. 1931 The
Wanderer. 1932 The Garden of the Prophet
1933 Prose Poems. 1934 Nymphs of the
Valley. 1948




CONTENTS

          The Coming of the Ship
          On Love
          On Marriage
          On Children
          On Giving
          On Eating and Drinking
          On Work
          On Joy and Sorrow
          On Houses
          On Clothes
          On Buying and Selling
          On Crime and Punishment
          On Laws
          On Freedom
          On Reason and Passion
          On Pain
          On Self-Knowledge
          On Teaching
          On Friendship
          On Talking
          On Time
          On Good and Evil
          On Prayer
          On Pleasure
          On Beauty
          On Religion
          On Death
          The Farewell




THE PROPHET

Almustafa, the chosen and the
beloved, who was a dawn unto his own
day, had waited twelve years in the city
of Orphalese for his ship that was to
return and bear him back to the isle of
his birth.

And in the twelfth year, on the seventh
day of Ielool, the month of reaping, he
climbed the hill without the city walls
and looked seaward; and he beheld his
ship coming with the mist.

Then the gates of his heart were flung
open, and his joy flew far over the sea.
And he closed his eyes and prayed in the
silences of his soul.

*****

But as he descended the hill, a sadness
came upon him, and he thought in his
heart:

How shall I go in peace and without
sorrow? Nay, not without a wound in the
spirit shall I leave this city.

Long
were the days of pain I have spent
within its walls, and long were the
nights of aloneness; and who can depart
from his pain and his aloneness without
regret?

Too many fragments of the spirit have I
scattered in these streets, and too many
are the children of my longing that walk
naked among these hills, and I cannot
withdraw from them without a burden and
an ache.

It is not a garment I cast off this
day, but a skin that I tear with my own
hands.

Nor is it a thought I leave behind me,
but a heart made sweet with hunger and
with thirst.

*****

Yet I cannot tarry longer.

The sea that calls all things unto her
calls me, and I must embark.

For to stay, though the hours burn in
the night, is to freeze and crystallize
and be bound in a mould.

Fain would I take with me all that is
here. But how shall I?

A voice cannot carry the tongue and
the lips that gave it wings. Alone
must it seek the ether.

And alone and without his nest shall the
eagle fly across the sun.

*****

Now when he reached the foot of the
hill, he turned again towards the sea,
and he saw his ship approaching the
harbour, and upon her prow the mariners,
the men of his own land.

And his soul cried out to them, and he
said:

Sons of my ancient mother, you riders of
the tides,

How often have you sailed in my dreams.
And now you come in my awakening, which
is my deeper dream.

Ready am I to go, and my eagerness with
sails full set awaits the wind.

Only another breath will I breathe in
this still air, only another loving look
cast backward,

And then I shall stand among you, a
seafarer among seafarers.

And you,
vast sea, sleepless mother,

Who alone are peace and freedom to the
river and the stream,

Only another winding will this stream
make, only another murmur in this glade,

And then shall I come to you, a
boundless drop to a boundless ocean.

*****

And as he walked he saw from afar men
and women leaving their fields and their
vineyards and hastening towards the city
gates.

And he heard their voices calling his
name, and shouting from field to field
telling one another of the coming of his
ship.

And he said to himself:

Shall the day of parting be the day of
gathering?

And shall it be said that my eve was in
truth my dawn?

And what shall I give unto him who has
left his plough in midfurrow, or to
him who has stopped the wheel of his
winepress?

Shall my heart become a
tree heavy-laden with fruit that I may
gather and give unto them?

And shall my desires flow like a
fountain that I may fill their cups?

Am I a harp that the hand of the mighty
may touch me, or a flute that his breath
may pass through me?

A seeker of silences am I, and what
treasure have I found in silences that I
may dispense with confidence?

If this is my day of harvest, in what
fields have I sowed the seed, and in
what unremembered seasons?

If this indeed be the hour in which I
lift up my lantern, it is not my flame
that shall burn therein.

Empty and dark shall I raise my lantern,

And the guardian of the night shall fill
it with oil and he shall light it also.

*****

These things he said in words. But much
in his heart remained unsaid. For he
himself could not speak his deeper
secret.

*****

[Illustration: 0020]

And when he entered into the city all
the people came to meet him, and they
were crying out to him as with one
voice.

And the elders of the city stood forth
and said:

Go not yet away from us.

A noontide have you been in our
twilight, and your youth has given us
dreams to dream.

No stranger are you among us, nor
a guest, but our son and our dearly
beloved.

Suffer not yet our eyes to hunger for
your face.

*****

And the priests and the priestesses said
unto him:

Let not the waves of the sea separate us
now, and the years you have spent in our
midst become a memory.

You have walked among us a spirit,
and your shadow has been a light
upon our faces.

Much have we loved you. But speechless
was our love, and with veils has it been
veiled.

Yet now it cries aloud unto you, and
would stand revealed before you.

And ever has it been that love knows
not its own depth until the hour of
separation.

*****

And others came also and entreated him.
But he answered them not. He only bent
his head; and those who stood near saw
his tears falling upon his breast.

And he and the people proceeded towards
the great square before the temple.

And there came out of the sanctuary a
woman whose name was Almitra. And she
was a seeress.

And he looked upon her with exceeding
tenderness, for it was she who had first
sought and believed in him when he had
been but a day in their city.

And she hailed him, saying:

Prophet of God, in quest of the
uttermost, long have you searched the
distances for your ship.

And now your ship has come, and you must
needs go.

Deep is your longing for the land of
your memories and the dwelling place
of your greater desires; and our love
would not bind you nor our needs hold
you.

Yet this we ask ere you leave us, that
you speak to us and give us of your
truth.

And we will give it unto our children,
and they unto their children, and it
shall not perish.

In your aloneness you have watched with
our days, and in your wakefulness you
have listened to the weeping and the
laughter of our sleep.

Now therefore disclose us to ourselves,
and tell us all that has been shown
you of that which is between birth and
death.

*****

And he answered,

People of Orphalese, of what can I
speak save of that which is even now
moving within your souls?

***** *****

Then said Almitra, Speak to us of
_Love_.

And he raised his head and looked upon
the people, and there fell a stillness
upon them. And with a great voice he
said:

When love beckons to you, follow him,

Though his ways are hard and steep.

And when his wings enfold you yield to
him,

Though the sword hidden among his
pinions may wound you.

And when he speaks to you believe in
him,

Though his voice may shatter your dreams
as the north wind lays waste the garden.

For even as love crowns you so shall
he crucify you. Even as he is for your
growth so is he for your pruning.

Even as he ascends to your height and
caresses your tenderest branches
that quiver in the sun,

So shall he descend to your roots and
shake them in their clinging to the
earth.

*****

Like sheaves of corn he gathers you unto
himself.

He threshes you to make you naked.

He sifts you to free you from your
husks.

He grinds you to whiteness.

He kneads you until you are pliant;

And then he assigns you to his sacred
fire, that you may become sacred bread
for God’s sacred feast.

*****

All these things shall love do unto you
that you may know the secrets of your
heart, and in that knowledge become a
fragment of Life’s heart.

But if in your fear you would seek only
love’s peace and love’s pleasure,

Then it is better for you that you
cover your nakedness and pass out of
love’s threshing-floor,

Into the seasonless world where you
shall laugh, but not all of your
laughter, and weep, but not all of your
tears.

*****

Love gives naught but itself and takes
naught but from itself.

Love possesses not nor would it be
possessed;

For love is sufficient unto love.

When you love you should not say, “God
is in my heart,” but rather, “I am in
the heart of God.”

And think not you can direct the course
of love, for love, if it finds you
worthy, directs your course.

Love has no other desire but to fulfil
itself.

But if you love and must needs have
desires, let these be your desires:

To melt and be like a running brook that
sings its melody to the night.

To know the pain of too much tenderness.

To be wounded by your own understanding
of love;

And to bleed willingly and joyfully.

To wake at dawn with a winged heart and
give thanks for another day of loving;

To rest at the noon hour and meditate
love’s ecstacy;

To return home at eventide with
gratitude;

And then to sleep with a prayer for
the beloved in your heart and a song of
praise upon your lips.

[Illustration: 0029]

***** *****

Then Almitra spoke again and said,
And what of _Marriage_ master?

And he answered saying:

You were born together, and together you
shall be forevermore.

You shall be together when the white
wings of death scatter your days.

Aye, you shall be together even in the
silent memory of God.

But let there be spaces in your
togetherness,

And let the winds of the heavens dance
between you.

*****

Love one another, but make not a bond of
love:

Let it rather be a moving sea between
the shores of your souls.

Fill each other’s cup but drink not from
one cup.

Give one another of your bread but eat
not from the same loaf.


Sing and dance together and be joyous, but let
each one of you be alone,

Even as the strings of a lute are alone
though they quiver with the same music.

*****

Give your hearts, but not into each
other’s keeping.

For only the hand of Life can contain
your hearts.

And stand together yet not too near
together:

For the pillars of the temple stand
apart,

And the oak tree and the cypress grow
not in each other’s shadow.

[Illustration: 0032]

***** *****

And a woman who held a babe
against her bosom said, Speak to us of
_Children_.

And he said:

Your children are not your children.

They are the sons and daughters of
Life’s longing for itself.

They come through you but not from you,

And though they are with you yet they
belong not to you.

*****

You may give them your love but not your
thoughts,

For they have their own thoughts.

You may house their bodies but not their
souls,

For their souls dwell in the house of
tomorrow, which you cannot visit, not
even in your dreams.

You may strive to be like them, but seek
not to make them like you.

For life goes not backward nor tarries with
yesterday.

You are the bows from which your
children as living arrows are sent
forth.

The archer sees the mark upon the path
of the infinite, and He bends you with
His might that His arrows may go swift
and far.

Let your bending in the Archer’s hand be
for gladness;

For even as he loves the arrow that
flies, so He loves also the bow that is
stable.

***** *****

Then said a rich man, Speak to us of
_Giving_.

And he answered:

You give but little when you give of
your possessions.

It is when you give of yourself that you
truly give.

For what are your possessions but things
you keep and guard for fear you may need
them tomorrow?

And tomorrow, what shall tomorrow bring
to the overprudent dog burying bones
in the trackless sand as he follows the
pilgrims to the holy city?

And what is fear of need but need
itself?

Is not dread of thirst when your well is
full, the thirst that is unquenchable?

There are those who give little of the
much which they have--and they give
it for recognition and their hidden
desire makes their gifts unwholesome.

And there are those who have little and
give it all.

These are the believers in life and
the bounty of life, and their coffer is
never empty.

There are those who give with joy, and
that joy is their reward.

And there are those who give with pain,
and that pain is their baptism.

And there are those who give and know
not pain in giving, nor do they seek
joy, nor give with mindfulness of
virtue;

They give as in yonder valley the myrtle
breathes its fragrance into space.

Through the hands of such as these God
speaks, and from behind their eyes He
smiles upon the earth.

[Illustration: 0039]

It is well to give when asked, but it
is better to give unasked, through
understanding;

And to the open-handed the search for
one who shall receive is joy greater
than giving.

And is there aught you would withhold?

All you have shall some day be given;

Therefore give now, that the season
of giving may be yours and not your
inheritors’.

You often say, “I would give, but only
to the deserving.”

The trees in your orchard say not so,
nor the flocks in your pasture.

They give that they may live, for to
withhold is to perish.

Surely he who is worthy to receive his
days and his nights, is worthy of all
else from you.

And he who has deserved to drink from
the ocean of life deserves to fill his
cup from your little stream.

And what desert greater shall there be,
than that which lies in the courage
and the confidence, nay the charity, of
receiving?

And who are you that men should rend
their bosom and unveil their pride,
that you may see their worth naked and
their pride unabashed?

See first that you yourself deserve to
be a giver, and an instrument of giving.

For in truth it is life that gives unto
life--while you, who deem yourself a
giver, are but a witness.

And you receivers--and you are
all receivers--assume no weight of
gratitude, lest you lay a yoke upon
yourself and upon him who gives.

Rather rise together with the giver on
his gifts as on wings;

For to be overmindful of your debt, is
ito doubt his generosity who has the
freehearted earth for mother, and God
for father.

[Illustration: 0042]

***** *****

Then an old man, a keeper of an
inn, said, Speak to us of _Eating and
Drinking_.

And he said:

Would that you could live on the
fragrance of the earth, and like an air
plant be sustained by the light.

But since you must kill to eat, and rob
the newly born of its mother’s milk to
quench your thirst, let it then be an
act of worship,

And let your board stand an altar on
which the pure and the innocent of
forest and plain are sacrificed for that
which is purer and still more innocent
in man.

*****

When you kill a beast say to him in your
heart,

“By the same power that slays you, I too
am slain; and I too shall be consumed.

For the law that delivered you into
my hand shall deliver me into a mightier
hand.

Your blood and my blood is naught but
the sap that feeds the tree of heaven.”

*****

And when you crush an apple with your
teeth, say to it in your heart,

“Your seeds shall live in my body,

And the buds of your tomorrow shall
blossom in my heart,

And your fragrance shall be my breath,
And together we shall rejoice through
all the seasons.”

*****

And in the autumn, when you gather
the grapes of your vineyards for the
winepress, say in your heart,

“I too am a vineyard, and my fruit shall
be gathered for the winepress,

And like new wine I shall be kept in
eternal vessels.”

And in winter, when you draw the wine,
let there be in your heart a song
for each cup;

And let there be in the song a
remembrance for the autumn days, and for
the vineyard, and for the winepress.

*****
*****

Then a ploughman said, Speak
to us of _Work_.

And he answered, saying:

You work that you may keep pace with the
earth and the soul of the earth.

For to be idle is to become a stranger
unto the seasons, and to step out of
life’s procession, that marches in
majesty and proud submission towards the
infinite.

When you work you are a flute through
whose heart the whispering of the hours
turns to music.

Which of you would be a reed, dumb and
silent, when all else sings together in
unison?

Always you have been told that work is a
curse and labour a misfortune.

But I say to you that when you work you
fulfil a part of earth’s furthest dream,
assigned to you when that dream was
born,

And in keeping yourself with labour you
are in truth loving life,

And to love life through labour is to be
intimate with life’s inmost secret.

*****

But if you in your pain call birth an
affliction and the support of the flesh
a curse written upon your brow, then I
answer that naught but the sweat of
your brow shall wash away that which is
written.

You have been told also that life is
darkness, and in your weariness you echo
what was said by the weary.

And I say that life is indeed darkness
‘save when there is urge,

And all urge is blind save when there is
knowledge,

And all knowledge is vain save when
there is work,

And all work is empty save when there is
love;

And when you work with love you bind
yourself to yourself, and to one
another, and to God.

*****

And what is it to work with love?

It is to weave the cloth with threads
drawn from your heart, even as if your
beloved were to wear that cloth.

It is to build a house with affection,
even as if your beloved were to dwell in
that house.

It is to sow seeds with tenderness and
reap the harvest with joy, even as if
your beloved were to eat the fruit.

It is to charge all things you fashion
with a breath of your own spirit,

And to know that all the blessed dead
are standing about you and watching.

Often have I heard you say, as if
speaking in sleep, “He who works in
marble, and finds the shape of his own
soul in the stone, is nobler than he who
ploughs the soil.

And he who seizes the rainbow to lay it on a cloth in the
likeness of man, is more than he who
makes the sandals for our feet.”

But I say, not in sleep but in the
overwakefulness of noontide, that the
wind speaks not more sweetly to the
giant oaks than to the least of all the
blades of grass;

And he alone is great who turns the
voice of the wind into a song made
sweeter by his own loving.

*****

Work is love made visible.

And if you cannot work with love but
only with distaste, it is better that
you should leave your work and sit at
the gate of the temple and take alms of
those who work with joy.

For if you bake bread with indifference,
you bake a bitter bread that feeds but
half man’s hunger.

And if you grudge the crushing of the
grapes, your grudge distils a poison in
the wine.

And if you sing though as
angels, and love not the singing, you
muffle man’s ears to the voices of the
day and the voices of the night.

***** *****

Then a woman said, Speak to us of
_Joy and Sorrow_.

And he answered:

Your joy is your sorrow unmasked.

And the selfsame well from which your
laughter rises was oftentimes filled
with your tears.

And how else can it be?

The deeper that sorrow carves into your
being, the more joy you can contain.

Is not the cup that holds your wine the
very cup that was burned in the potter’s
oven?

And is not the lute that soothes your
spirit, the very wood that was hollowed
with knives?

When you are joyous, look deep into your
heart and you shall find it is only
that which has given you sorrow that is
giving you joy.

When you are sorrowful look again in
your heart, and you shall see that
in truth you are weeping for that which
has been your delight.

*****

Some of you say, “Joy is greater than
sorrow,” and others say, “Nay, sorrow is
the greater.”

But I say unto you, they are
inseparable.

Together they come, and when one sits
alone with you at your board, remember
that the other is asleep upon your bed.

Verily you are suspended like scales
between your sorrow and your joy.

Only when you are empty are you at
standstill and balanced.

When the treasure-keeper lifts you to
weigh his gold and his silver, needs
must your joy or your sorrow rise or
fall.

***** *****

Then a mason came forth and said,
Speak to us of _Houses_.

And he answered and said:

Build of your imaginings a bower in the
wilderness ere you build a house within
the city walls.

For even as you have home-comings in
your twilight, so has the wanderer in
you, the ever distant and alone.

Your house is your larger body.

It grows in the sun and sleeps in the
stillness of the night; and it is not
dreamless. Does not your house dream?
and dreaming, leave the city for grove
or hilltop?

Would that I could gather your houses
into my hand, and like a sower scatter
them in forest and meadow.

Would the valleys were your streets, and
the green paths your alleys, that you
might seek one another through
vineyards, and come with the fragrance
of the earth in your garments.

But these things are not yet to be.

In their fear your forefathers gathered
you too near together. And that fear
shall endure a little longer. A little
longer shall your city walls separate
your hearths from your fields.

*****

And tell me, people of Orphalese, what
have you in these houses? And what is it
you guard with fastened doors?

Have you peace, the quiet urge that
reveals your power?

Have you remembrances, the glimmering
arches that span the summits of the
mind?

Have you beauty, that leads the heart
from things fashioned of wood and stone
to the holy mountain?

Tell me, have you these in your houses?

Or have you only comfort, and the lust
for comfort, that stealthy thing that
enters the house a guest, and then
becomes a host, and then a master?

*****

Ay, and it becomes a tamer, and with
hook and scourge makes puppets of your
larger desires.

Though its hands are silken, its heart
is of iron.

It lulls you to sleep only to stand by
your bed and jeer at the dignity of the
flesh.

It makes mock of your sound senses, and
lays them in thistledown like fragile
vessels.

Verily the lust for comfort murders
the passion of the soul, and then walks
grinning in the funeral.

But you, children of space, you restless
in rest, you shall not be trapped nor
tamed.

Your house shall be not an anchor but a
mast.

It shall not be a glistening film that
covers a wound, but an eyelid that
guards the eye.

You shall not fold your wings that you
may pass through doors, nor bend your
heads that they strike not against a
ceiling, nor fear to breathe lest walls
should crack and fall down.

You shall not dwell in tombs made by the
dead for the living.

And though of magnificence and
splendour, your house shall not hold
your secret nor shelter your longing.

For that which is boundless in you
abides in the mansion of the sky, whose
door is the morning mist, and whose
windows are the songs and the silences
of night.

***** *****

And the weaver said, Speak to us of
_Clothes_.

And he answered:

Your clothes conceal much of your
beauty, yet they hide not the
unbeautiful.

And though you seek in garments the
freedom of privacy you may find in them
a harness and a chain.

Would that you could meet the sun and
the wind with more of your skin and less
of your raiment,

For the breath of life is in the
sunlight and the hand of life is in the
wind.

Some of you say, “It is the north wind
who has woven the clothes we wear.”

And I say, Ay, it was the north wind,

But shame was his loom, and the
softening of the sinews was his thread.

And when his work was done he laughed in
the forest.

Forget not that modesty
is for a shield against the eye of the
unclean.

And when the unclean shall be no more,
what were modesty but a fetter and a
fouling of the mind?

And forget not that the earth delights
to feel your bare feet and the winds
long to play with your hair.

***** *****

And a merchant said, Speak to us of
_Buying and Selling_.

And he answered and said:

To you the earth yields her fruit, and
you shall not want if you but know how
to fill your hands.

It is in exchanging the gifts of the
earth that you shall find abundance and
be satisfied.

Yet unless the exchange be in love and
kindly justice, it will but lead some to
greed and others to hunger.

When in the market place you toilers of
the sea and fields and vineyards meet
the weavers and the potters and the
gatherers of spices,--

Invoke then the master spirit of the
earth, to come into your midst and
sanctify the scales and the reckoning
that weighs value against value.

And suffer not the barren-handed to take
part in your transactions, who would
sell their words for your labour.

To such men you should say,

“Come with us to the field, or go with
our brothers to the sea and cast your
net;

For the land and the sea shall be
bountiful to you even as to us.”

*****

And if there come the singers and the
dancers and the flute players,--buy of
their gifts also.

For they too are gatherers of fruit and
frankincense, and that which they bring,
though fashioned of dreams, is raiment
and food for your soul.

And before you leave the market place,
see that no one has gone his way with
empty hands.

For the master spirit of the earth shall
not sleep peacefully upon the wind
till the needs of the least of you are
satisfied.

***** *****

Then one of the judges of the city
stood forth and said, Speak to us of
_Crime and Punishment_.

And he answered, saying:

It is when your spirit goes wandering
upon the wind,

That you, alone and unguarded, commit
a wrong unto others and therefore unto
yourself.

And for that wrong committed must you
knock and wait a while unheeded at the
gate of the blessed.

Like the ocean is your god-self;

It remains for ever undefiled.

And like the ether it lifts but the
winged.

Even like the sun is your god-self;

It knows not the ways of the mole nor
seeks it the holes of the serpent.

But your god-self dwells not alone
in your being.

Much in you is still man, and much in
you is not yet man,

But a shapeless pigmy that walks asleep
in the mist searching for its own
awakening.

And of the man in you would I now speak.

For it is he and not your god-self nor
the pigmy in the mist, that knows crime
and the punishment of crime.

*****

Oftentimes have I heard you speak of one
who commits a wrong as though he were
not one of you, but a stranger unto you
and an intruder upon your world.

But I say that even as the holy and the
righteous cannot rise beyond the highest
which is in each one of you,

So the wicked and the weak cannot fall
lower than the lowest which is in you
also.

And as a single leaf turns not yellow
but with the silent knowledge of the
whole tree,

So the wrong-doer cannot
do wrong without the hidden will of you
all.

Like a procession you walk together
towards your god-self.

[Illustration: 0064]

You are the way and the wayfarers.

And when one of you falls down he falls
for those behind him, a caution against
the stumbling stone.

Ay, and he falls for those ahead of him,
who though faster and surer of foot, yet
removed not the stumbling stone.

And this also, though the word lie heavy
upon your hearts:

The murdered is not unaccountable for
his own murder,

And the robbed is not blameless in being
robbed.

The righteous is not innocent of the
deeds of the wicked,

And the white-handed is not clean in the
doings of the felon.

Yea, the guilty is oftentimes the victim
of the injured,

And still more often the condemned is
the burden bearer for the guiltless
and unblamed.

You cannot separate the just from the
unjust and the good from the wicked;

For they stand together before the face
of the sun even as the black thread and
the white are woven together.

And when the black thread breaks, the
weaver shall look into the whole cloth,
and he shall examine the loom also.

*****

If any of you would bring to judgment
the unfaithful wife,

Let him also weigh the heart of her
husband in scales, and measure his soul
with measurements.

And let him who would lash the offender
look unto the spirit of the offended.

And if any of you would punish in the
name of righteousness and lay the ax
unto the evil tree, let him see to its
roots;

And verily he will find the roots of the
good and the bad, the fruitful and the
fruitless, all entwined together in
the silent heart of the earth.

And you judges who would be just,

What judgment pronounce you upon him
who though honest in the flesh yet is a
thief in spirit?

What penalty lay you upon him who slays
in the flesh yet is himself slain in the
spirit?

And how prosecute you him who in action
is a deceiver and an oppressor,

Yet who also is aggrieved and outraged?

*****

And how shall you punish those whose
remorse is already greater than their
misdeeds?

Is not remorse the justice which is
administered by that very law which you
would fain serve?

Yet you cannot lay remorse upon the
innocent nor lift it from the heart of
the guilty.

Unbidden shall it call in the night,
that men may wake and gaze upon
themselves.

And you who would
understand justice, how shall you unless
you look upon all deeds in the fullness
of light?

Only then shall you know that the erect
and the fallen are but one man standing
in twilight between the night of his
pigmy-self and the day of his god-self,
And that the corner-stone of the temple
is not higher than the lowest stone in
its foundation.

***** *****

Then a lawyer said, But what of our
_Laws_, master?

And he answered:

You delight in laying down laws,

Yet you delight more in breaking them.

Like children playing by the ocean who
build sand-towers with constancy and
then destroy them with laughter.

But while you build your sand-towers the
ocean brings more sand to the shore,

And when you destroy them the ocean
laughs with you.

Verily the ocean laughs always with the
innocent.

But what of those to whom life is not
an ocean, and man-made laws are not
sand-towers,

But to whom life is a rock, and the law
a chisel with which they would carve it
in their own likeness?

What of the cripple who hates dancers?

What of the ox who loves his yoke and
deems the elk and deer of the forest
stray and vagrant things?

What of the old serpent who cannot shed
his skin, and calls all others naked and
shameless?

And of him who comes early to the
wedding-feast, and when over-fed and
tired goes his way saying that all
feasts are violation and all feasters
lawbreakers?

*****

What shall I say of these save that
they too stand in the sunlight, but with
their backs to the sun?

They see only their shadows, and their
shadows are their laws.

And what is the sun to them but a caster
of shadows?

And what is it to acknowledge the
laws but to stoop down and trace their
shadows upon the earth?

But you who walk facing the sun, what
images drawn on the earth can hold
you?

You who travel with the wind, what
weather-vane shall direct your course?

What man’s law shall bind you if you
break your yoke but upon no man’s prison
door?

What laws shall you fear if you dance
but stumble against no man’s iron
chains?

And who is he that shall bring you to
judgment if you tear off your garment
yet leave it in no man’s path?

*****

People of Orphalese, you can muffle the
drum, and you can loosen the strings
of the lyre, but who shall command the
skylark not to sing?

***** *****

And an orator said, Speak to us of
_Freedom_.

And he answered:

At the city gate and by your fireside
I have seen you prostrate yourself and
worship your own freedom,

Even as slaves humble themselves before
a tyrant and praise him though he slays
them.

Ay, in the grove of the temple and in
the shadow of the citadel I have seen
the freest among you wear their freedom
as a yoke and a handcuff.

And my heart bled within me; for you
can only be free when even the desire
of seeking freedom becomes a harness
to you, and when you cease to speak of
freedom as a goal and a fulfilment.

You shall be free indeed when your
days are not without a care nor your
nights without a want and a grief,

But rather when these things girdle your
life and yet you rise above them naked
and unbound.

*****

And how shall you rise beyond your days
and nights unless you break the
chains which you at the dawn of your
understanding have fastened around your
noon hour?

In truth that which you call freedom is
the strongest of these chains, though
its links glitter in the sun and dazzle
your eyes.

And what is it but fragments of your
own self you would discard that you may
become free?

If it is an unjust law you would
abolish, that law was written with your
own hand upon your own forehead.

You cannot erase it by burning your law
books nor by washing the foreheads of
your judges, though you pour the sea
upon them.

And if it is a despot you would
dethrone, see first that his throne
erected within you is destroyed.

For how can a tyrant rule the free and
the proud, but for a tyranny in their
own freedom and a shame in their own
pride?

And if it is a care you would cast off,
that cart has been chosen by you rather
than imposed upon you.

And if it is a fear you would dispel,
the seat of that fear is in your heart
and not in the hand of the feared.

*****

Verily all things move within your being
in constant half embrace, the desired
and the dreaded, the repugnant and the
cherished, the pursued and that which
you would escape.

These things move within you as lights
and shadows in pairs that cling.

And when the shadow fades and is no
more, the light that lingers becomes a
shadow to another light.

And thus your freedom when it loses its
fetters becomes itself the fetter of a
greater freedom.

***** *****

And the priestess spoke again
and said: Speak to us of _Reason and
Passion_.

And he answered, saying:

Your soul is oftentimes a battlefield,
upon which your reason and your judgment
wage war against your passion and your
appetite.

Would that I could be the peacemaker in
your soul, that I might turn the discord
and the rivalry of your elements into
oneness and melody.

But how shall I, unless you yourselves
be also the peacemakers, nay, the lovers
of all your elements?

Your reason and your passion are the
rudder and the sails of your seafaring
soul.

If either your sails or your rudder be
broken, you can but toss and drift,
or else be held at a standstill in
mid-seas.

For reason, ruling alone, is a force confining; and passion,
unattended, is a flame that burns to its
own destruction.

Therefore let your soul exalt your
reason to the height of passion, that it
may sing;

And let it direct your passion with
reason, that your passion may live
through its own daily resurrection,
and like the phoenix rise above its own
ashes.

*****

I would have you consider your judgment
and your appetite even as you would two
loved guests in your house.

Surely you would not honour one guest
above the other; for he who is more
mindful of one loses the love and the
faith of both

Among the hills, when you sit in the
cool shade of the white poplars, sharing
the peace and serenity of distant fields
and meadows--then let your heart say in
silence, “God rests in reason.”

And when the storm comes, and the
mighty wind shakes the forest,
and thunder and lightning proclaim the
majesty of the sky,--then let your heart
say in awe, “God moves in passion.”

And since you are a breath in God’s
sphere, and a leaf in God’s forest, you
too should rest in reason and move in
passion.

***** *****

And a woman spoke, saying, Tell us
of _Pain_.

And he said:

Your pain is the breaking of the shell
that encloses your understanding.

Even as the stone of the fruit must
break, that its heart may stand in the
sun, so must you know pain.

And could you keep your heart in wonder
at the daily miracles of your life, your
pain would not seem less wondrous than
your joy;

And you would accept the seasons of your
heart, even as you have always accepted
the seasons that pass over your fields.

And you would watch with serenity
through the winters of your grief.

Much of your pain is self-chosen.

It is the bitter potion by which the
physician within you heals your sick
self.

Therefore trust the physician, and drink
his remedy in silence and tranquillity:
For his hand, though heavy and hard, is
guided by the tender hand of the Unseen,
And the cup he brings, though it burn
your lips, has been fashioned of the
clay which the Potter has moistened with
His own sacred tears.

***** *****

And a man said, Speak to us of
_Self-Knowledge_.

And he answered, saying:

Your hearts know in silence the secrets
of the days and the nights.

But your ears thirst for the sound of
your heart’s knowledge.

You would know in words that which you
have always known in thought.

You would touch with your fingers the
naked body of your dreams.

And it is well you should.

The hidden well-spring of your soul must
needs rise and run murmuring to the sea;

And the treasure of your infinite depths
would be revealed to your eyes.

But let there be no scales to weigh your
unknown treasure;

And seek not the depths of your
knowledge with staff or sounding
line.

For self is a sea boundless and
measureless.

*****

Say not, “I have found the truth,” but
rather, “I have found a truth.”

Say not, “I have found the path of the
soul.” Say rather, “I have met the soul
walking upon my path.”

For the soul walks upon all paths.

The soul walks not upon a line, neither
does it grow like a reed.

The soul unfolds itself, like a lotus of
countless petals.

[Illustration: 0083]

***** *****

Then said a teacher, Speak to us of
_Teaching_.

And he said:

“No man can reveal to you aught but that
which already lies half asleep in the
dawning of your knowledge.

The teacher who walks in the shadow of
the temple, among his followers, gives
not of his wisdom but rather of his
faith and his lovingness.

If he is indeed wise he does not bid
you enter the house of his wisdom, but
rather leads you to the threshold of
your own mind.

The astronomer may speak to you of his
understanding of space, but he cannot
give you his understanding.

The musician may sing to you of the
rhythm which is in all space, but he
cannot give you the ear which arrests
the rhythm nor the voice that echoes it.

And he who is versed in the science
of numbers can tell of the regions
of weight and measure, but he cannot
conduct you thither.

For the vision of one man lends not its
wings to another man.

And even as each one of you stands alone
in God’s knowledge, so must each one of
you be alone in his knowledge of God and
in his understanding of the earth.

***** *****

And a youth said, Speak to us of
_Friendship_.

And he answered, saying:

Your friend is your needs answered.

He is your field which you sow with love
and reap with thanksgiving.

And he is your board and your fireside.

For you come to him with your hunger,
and you seek him for peace.

When your friend speaks his mind you
fear not the “nay” in your own mind, nor
do you withhold the “ay.”

And when he is silent your heart ceases
not to listen to his heart;

For without words, in friendship, all
thoughts, all desires, all expectations
are born and shared, with joy that is
unacclaimed.

When you part from your friend, you
grieve not;

For that which you love most in him
may be clearer in his absence, as the
mountain to the climber is clearer
from the plain.

And let there be no purpose in friendship save the deepening
of the spirit.

For love that seeks aught but the
disclosure of its own mystery is not
love but a net cast forth: and only the
unprofitable is caught.

*****

And let your best be for your friend.

If he must know the ebb of your tide,
let him know its flood also.

For what is your friend that you should
seek him with hours to kill?

Seek him always with hours to live.

For it is his to fill your need, but not
your emptiness.

And in the sweetness of friendship
let there be laughter, and sharing of
pleasures.

For in the dew of little things
the heart finds its morning and is
refreshed.

***** *****

And then a scholar said, Speak of _Talking_.

And he answered, saying:

You talk when you cease to be at peace
with your thoughts;

And when you can no longer dwell in the
solitude of your heart you live in your
lips, and sound is a diversion and a
pastime.

And in much of your talking, thinking is
half murdered.

For thought is a bird of space, that in
a cage of words may indeed unfold its
wings but cannot fly.

There are those among you who seek the
talkative through fear of being alone.

The silence of aloneness reveals to
their eyes their naked selves and they
would escape.

And there are those who talk, and
without knowledge or forethought reveal
a truth which they themselves do not
understand.

And there are those who have the truth
within them, but they tell it not in
words.

In the bosom of such as these the spirit
dwells in rhythmic silence.

*****

When you meet your friend on the
roadside or in the market place, let the
spirit in you move your lips and direct
your tongue.

Let the voice within your voice speak to
the ear of his ear;

For his soul will keep the truth of
your heart as the taste of the wine is
remembered

When the colour is forgotten and the
vessel is no more.

***** *****

And an astronomer said, Master, what of _Time_?

And he answered:

You would measure time the measureless
and the immeasurable.

You would adjust your conduct and
even direct the course of your spirit
according to hours and seasons.

Of time you would make a stream upon
whose bank you would sit and watch its
flowing.

Yet the timeless in you is aware of
life’s timelessness,

And knows that yesterday is but today’s
memory and tomorrow is today’s dream.

And that that which sings and
contemplates in you is still dwelling
within the bounds of that first moment
which scattered the stars into space.

Who among you does not feel that his
power to love is boundless?

And yet who does not feel that very
love, though boundless, encompassed
within the centre of his being, and
moving not from love thought to love
thought, nor from love deeds to other
love deeds?

And is not time even as love is,
undivided and paceless?

*****

But if in your thought you must measure
time into seasons, let each season
encircle all the other seasons,

And let today embrace the past with
remembrance and the future with longing.

***** *****

And one of the elders of the city
said, Speak to us of _Good and Evil_.

And he answered:

Of the good in you I can speak, but not
of the evil.

For what is evil but good tortured by
its own hunger and thirst?

Verily when good is hungry it seeks food
even in dark caves, and when it thirsts
it drinks even of dead waters.

You are good when you are one with
yourself.

Yet when you are not one with yourself
you are not evil.

For a divided house is not a den of
thieves; it is only a divided house.

And a ship without rudder may wander
aimlessly among perilous isles yet sink
not to the bottom.

You are good when
you strive to give of yourself.

Yet you are not evil when you seek gain
for yourself.

For when you strive for gain you are
but a root that clings to the earth and
sucks at her breast.

Surely the fruit cannot say to the root,
“Be like me, ripe and full and ever
giving of your abundance.”

For to the fruit giving is a need, as
receiving is a need to the root.

*****

You are good when you are fully awake in
your speech,

Yet you are not evil when you sleep
while your tongue staggers without
purpose.

And even stumbling speech may strengthen
a weak tongue.

You are good when you walk to your goal
firmly and with bold steps.

Yet you are not evil when you go thither
limping.

Even those who limp go not backward.

But you who are strong and swift, see
that you do not limp before the lame,
deeming it kindness.

*****

You are good in countless ways, and you
are not evil when you are not good,

You are only loitering and sluggard.

Pity that the stags cannot teach
swiftness to the turtles.

In your longing for your giant self lies
your goodness: and that longing is in
all of you.

But in some of you that longing is a
torrent rushing with might to the sea,
carrying the secrets of the hillsides
and the songs of the forest.

And in others it is a flat stream that
loses itself in angles and bends and
lingers before it reaches the shore.

But let not him who longs much say to
him who longs little, “Wherefore are
you slow and halting?”

For the truly good ask not the naked,
“Where is your garment?” nor the
houseless, “What has befallen your
house?”

***** *****

Then a priestess said, Speak to us
of _Prayer_.

And he answered, saying:

You pray in your distress and in your
need; would that you might pray also
in the fullness of your joy and in your
days of abundance.

For what is prayer but the expansion of
yourself into the living ether?

And if it is for your comfort to pour
your darkness into space, it is also for
your delight to pour forth the dawning
of your heart.

And if you cannot but weep when your
soul summons you to prayer, she should
spur you again and yet again, though
weeping, until you shall come laughing.

When you pray you rise to meet in the
air those who are praying at that very
hour, and whom save in prayer you
may not meet.

Therefore let your visit to that temple
invisible be for naught but ecstasy and
sweet communion.

For if you should enter the temple for
no other purpose than asking you shall
not receive:

And if you should enter into it to
humble yourself you shall not be lifted:

Or even if you should enter into it to
beg for the good of others you shall not
be heard.

It is enough that you enter the temple
invisible.

*****

I cannot teach you how to pray in words.

God listens not to your words save when
He Himself utters them through your
lips.

And I cannot teach you the prayer of the
seas and the forests and the mountains.

But you who are born of the
mountains and the forests and the seas
can find their prayer in your heart,

And if you but listen in the stillness
of the night you shall hear them saying
in silence,

“Our God, who art our winged self, it is
thy will in us that willeth.

It is thy desire in us that desireth.

It is thy urge in us that would turn our
nights, which are thine, into days which
are thine also.

We cannot ask thee for aught, for thou
knowest our needs before they are born
in us:

Thou art our need; and in giving us more
of thyself thou givest us all.”

[Illustration: 0100]

***** *****

Then a hermit, who visited the city
once a year, came forth and said, Speak
to us of _Pleasure_.

And he answered, saying:

Pleasure is a freedom-song,

But it is not freedom.

It is the blossoming of your desires,

But it is not their fruit.

It is a depth calling unto a height,

But it is not the deep nor the high.

It is the caged taking wing,

But it is not space encompassed.

Ay, in very truth, pleasure is a
freedom-song.

And I fain would have you sing it with
fullness of heart; yet I would not have
you lose your hearts in the singing.

Some of your youth seek pleasure as if
it were all, and they are judged and
rebuked.

I would not judge nor
rebuke them. I would have them seek.

For they shall find pleasure, but not
her alone;

Seven are her sisters, and the least of
them is more beautiful than pleasure.

Have you not heard of the man who was
digging in the earth for roots and found
a treasure?

*****

And some of your elders remember
pleasures with regret like wrongs
committed in drunkenness.

But regret is the beclouding of the mind
and not its chastisement.

They should remember their pleasures
with gratitude, as they would the
harvest of a summer.

Yet if it comforts them to regret, let
them be comforted.

And there are among you those who
are neither young to seek nor old to
remember;

And in their fear of seeking and
remembering they shun all pleasures,
lest they neglect the spirit or offend
against it.

But even in their foregoing is their
pleasure.

And thus they too find a treasure though
they dig for roots with quivering hands.

But tell me, who is he that can offend
the spirit?

Shall the nightingale offend the
stillness of the night, or the firefly
the stars?

And shall your flame or your smoke
burden the wind?

Think you the spirit is a still pool
which you can trouble with a staff?

*****

Oftentimes in denying yourself pleasure
you do but store the desire in the
recesses of your being.

Who knows but that which seems omitted
today, waits for tomorrow?

Even your body knows its heritage
and its rightful need and will not be
deceived.

And your body is the harp of your soul,

And it is yours to bring forth sweet
music from it or confused sounds.

*****

And now you ask in your heart, “How
shall we distinguish that which is
good in pleasure from that which is not
good?”

Go to your fields and your gardens, and
you shall learn that it is the pleasure
of the bee to gather honey of the
flower,

But it is also the pleasure of the
flower to yield its honey to the bee.

For to the bee a flower is a fountain of
life,

And to the flower a bee is a messenger
of love,

And to both, bee and flower, the giving
and the receiving of pleasure is a need
and an ecstasy.

People of Orphalese, be in your
pleasures like the flowers and the bees.

***** *****

And a poet said, Speak to us of
_Beauty_.

And he answered:

Where shall you seek beauty, and how
shall you find her unless she herself be
your way and your guide?

And how shall you speak of her except
she be the weaver of your speech?

The aggrieved and the injured say,
“Beauty is kind and gentle.

Like a young mother half-shy of her own
glory she walks among us.”

And the passionate say, “Nay, beauty is
a thing of might and dread.

Like the tempest she shakes the earth
beneath us and the sky above us.”

The tired and the weary say, “Beauty is
of soft whisperings. She speaks in our
spirit.

Her voice yields to our
silences like a faint light that quivers
in fear of the shadow.”

But the restless say, “We have heard her
shouting among the mountains,

And with her cries came the sound of
hoofs, and the beating of wings and the
roaring of lions.”

At night the watchmen of the city say,
“Beauty shall rise with the dawn from
the east.”

And at noontide the toilers and the
wayfarers say, “We have seen her leaning
over the earth from the windows of the
sunset.”

*****

In winter say the snow-bound, “She shall
come with the spring leaping upon the
hills.”

And in the summer heat the reapers
say, “We have seen her dancing with the
autumn leaves, and we saw a drift of
snow in her hair.”

All these things have you said of beauty,

Yet in truth you spoke not of her but of
needs unsatisfied,

And beauty is not a need but an ecstasy.

It is not a mouth thirsting nor an empty
hand stretched forth,

But rather a heart enflamed and a soul
enchanted.

It is not the image you would see nor
the song you would hear,

But rather an image you see though you
close your eyes and a song you hear
though you shut your ears.

It is not the sap within the furrowed
bark, nor a wing attached to a claw,

But rather a garden for ever in bloom
and a flock of angels for ever in
flight.

*****

People of Orphalese, beauty is life when
life unveils her holy face.

But you are life and you are the veil.

Beauty is eternity gazing at itself in a mirror.

But you are eternity and you are the
mirror.

***** *****

And an old priest said, Speak to us
of _Religion_.

And he said:

Have I spoken this day of aught else?

Is not religion all deeds and all
reflection,

And that which is neither deed nor
reflection, but a wonder and a surprise
ever springing in the soul, even while
the hands hew the stone or tend the
loom?

Who can separate his faith from
his actions, or his belief from his
occupations?

Who can spread his hours before him,
saying, “This for God and this for
myself; This for my soul, and this other
for my body?”

All your hours are wings that beat
through space from self to self.

He who wears his morality but as his best
garment were better naked.

The wind and the sun will tear no holes
in his skin.

And he who defines his conduct by ethics
imprisons his song-bird in a cage.

The freest song comes not through bars
and wires.

And he to whom worshipping is a window,
to open but also to shut, has not yet
visited the house of his soul whose
windows are from dawn to dawn.

*****

Your daily life is your temple and your
religion.

Whenever you enter into it take with you
your all.

Take the plough and the forge and the
mallet and the lute,

The things you have fashioned in
necessity or for delight.

For in revery you cannot rise above your
achievements nor fall lower than your
failures.

And take with you all men:

For in adoration you cannot fly higher than
their hopes nor humble yourself lower
than their despair.

*****

And if you would know God be not
therefore a solver of riddles.

Rather look about you and you shall see
Him playing with your children.

And look into space; you shall see Him
walking in the cloud, outstretching His
arms in the lightning and descending in
rain.

You shall see Him smiling in flowers,
then rising and waving His hands in
trees.

***** *****

Then Almitra spoke, saying, We would ask now of _Death_.

And he said:

You would know the secret of death.

But how shall you find it unless you
seek it in the heart of life?

The owl whose night-bound eyes are blind
unto the day cannot unveil the mystery
of light.

If you would indeed behold the spirit
of death, open your heart wide unto the
body of life.

For life and death are one, even as the
river and the sea are one.

In the depth of your hopes and desires
lies your silent knowledge of the
beyond;

And like seeds dreaming beneath the snow
your heart dreams of spring.

Trust the dreams, for in them is hidden
the gate to eternity.

Your fear of death is but the trembling of the
shepherd when he stands before the king
whose hand is to be laid upon him in
honour.

Is the shepherd not joyful beneath his
trembling, that he shall wear the mark
of the king?

Yet is he not more mindful of his
trembling?

*****

For what is it to die but to stand naked
in the wind and to melt into the sun?

And what is it to cease breathing, but
to free the breath from its restless
tides, that it may rise and expand and
seek God unencumbered?

Only when you drink from the river of
silence shall you indeed sing.

And when you have reached the mountain
top, then you shall begin to climb.

And when the earth shall claim your
limbs, then shall you truly dance.




And now it was evening.

And Almitra the seeress said, Blessed be
this day and this place and your spirit
that has spoken.

And he answered, Was it I who spoke? Was
I not also a listener?

*****

Then he descended the steps of the
Temple and all the people followed him.
And he reached his ship and stood upon
the deck.

And facing the people again, he raised
his voice and said:

People of Orphalese, the wind bids me
leave you.

Less hasty am I than the wind, yet I
must go.

We wanderers, ever seeking the lonelier
way, begin no day where we have ended
another day; and no sunrise finds us
where sunset left us.

Even while the earth sleeps we travel.

We are the seeds of the tenacious
plant, and it is in our ripeness and our
fullness of heart that we are given to
the wind and are scattered.

*****

Brief were my days among you, and
briefer still the words I have spoken.

But should my voice fade in your ears,
and my love vanish in your memory, then
I will come again,

And with a richer heart and lips more
yielding to the spirit will I speak.

Yea, I shall return with the tide,

And though death may hide me, and the
greater silence enfold me, yet again
will I seek your understanding.

And not in vain will I seek.

If aught I have said is truth, that
truth shall reveal itself in a clearer
voice, and in words more kin to your
thoughts.

I go with the wind, people of
Orphalese, but not down into emptiness;

And if this day is not a fulfilment
of your needs and my love, then let it
be a promise till another day.

Man’s needs change, but not his love,
nor his desire that his love should
satisfy his needs.

Know therefore, that from the greater
silence I shall return.

The mist that drifts away at dawn,
leaving but dew in the fields, shall
rise and gather into a cloud and then
fall down in rain.

And not unlike the mist have I been.

In the stillness of the night I have
walked in your streets, and my spirit
has entered your houses,

And your heart-beats were in my heart,
and your breath was upon my face, and I
knew you all.

Ay, I knew your joy and your pain,
and in your sleep your dreams were my
dreams.

And oftentimes I was among you a lake
among the mountains.

I mirrored the summits in you and the
bending slopes, and even the
passing flocks of your thoughts and your
desires.

And to my silence came the laughter
of your children in streams, and the
longing of your youths in rivers.

And when they reached my depth the
streams and the rivers ceased not yet to
sing.

[Illustration: 0119]

But sweeter still than laughter and
greater than longing came to me.

It was the boundless in you;

The vast man in whom you are all but
cells and sinews;

He in whose chant all your singing is
but a soundless throbbing.

It is in the vast man that you are vast,

And in beholding him that I beheld you
and loved you.

For what distances can love reach that
are not in that vast sphere?

What visions, what expectations and what
presumptions can outsoar that flight?

Like a giant oak tree covered with apple
blossoms is the vast man in you.

His might binds you to the earth, his
fragrance lifts you into space, and in
his durability you are deathless.

*****

You have been told that, even like a
chain, you are as weak as your weakest
link.

This is but half the truth. You are also
as strong as your strongest link.

To measure you by your smallest deed
is to reckon the power of ocean by the
frailty of its foam.

To judge you by your failures is to
cast blame upon the seasons for their
inconstancy.

Ay, you are like an ocean,

And though heavy-grounded ships await
the tide upon your shores, yet, even
like an ocean, you cannot hasten your
tides.

And like the seasons you are also,

And though in your winter you deny your
spring,

Yet spring, reposing within you, smiles
in her drowsiness and is not offended.

Think not I say these things in
order that you may say the one to the
other, “He praised us well. He saw but
the good in us.”

I only speak to you in words of that
which you yourselves know in thought.

And what is word knowledge but a shadow
of wordless knowledge?

Your thoughts and my words are waves
from a sealed memory that keeps records
of our yesterdays,

And of the ancient days when the earth
knew not us nor herself,

And of nights when earth was up-wrought
with confusion.

*****

Wise men have come to you to give you
of their wisdom. I came to take of your
wisdom:

And behold I have found that which is
greater than wisdom.

It is a flame spirit in you ever
gathering more of itself,

While you, heedless of its expansion,
bewail the withering of your days.

It is life in quest of life in
bodies that fear the grave.

*****

There are no graves here.

These mountains and plains are a cradle
and a stepping-stone.

Whenever you pass by the field where
you have laid your ancestors look well
thereupon, and you shall see yourselves
and your children dancing hand in hand.

Verily you often make merry without
knowing.

Others have come to you to whom for
golden promises made unto your faith
you have given but riches and power and
glory.

Less than a promise have I given, and
yet more generous have you been to me.

You have given me my deeper thirsting
after life.

Surely there is no greater gift to a man
than that which turns all his aims
into parching lips and all life into a
fountain.

[Illustration: 0125]

And in this lies my honour and my reward,--

That whenever I come to the fountain
to drink I find the living water itself
thirsty;

And it drinks me while I drink it.

*****

Some of you have deemed me proud and
over-shy to receive gifts.

Too proud indeed am I to receive wages,
but not gifts.

And though I have eaten berries among
the hills when you would have had me sit
at your board,

And slept in the portico of the temple
when you would gladly have sheltered me,

Yet was it not your loving mindfulness
of my days and my nights that made food
sweet to my mouth and girdled my sleep
with visions?

For this I bless you most:

You give much and know not that you give
at all.

Verily the kindness that gazes upon itself in a mirror turns to
stone,

And a good deed that calls itself by
tender names becomes the parent to a
curse.

*****

And some of you have called me aloof,
and drunk with my own aloneness,

And you have said, “He holds council
with the trees of the forest, but not
with men.

He sits alone on hill-tops and looks
down upon our city.”

True it is that I have climbed the hills
and walked in remote places.

How could I have seen you save from a
great height or a great distance?

How can one be indeed near unless he be
far?

And others among you called unto me, not
in words, and they said,

“Stranger, stranger, lover of
unreachable heights, why dwell you among
the summits where eagles build
their nests?

Why seek you the unattainable?

What storms would you trap in your net,

And what vaporous birds do you hunt in
the sky?

Come and be one of us.

Descend and appease your hunger with our
bread and quench your thirst with our
wine.”

In the solitude of their souls they said
these things;

But were their solitude deeper they
would have known that I sought but the
secret of your joy and your pain,

And I hunted only your larger selves
that walk the sky.

*****

But the hunter was also the hunted;

For many of my arrows left my bow only
to seek my own breast.

And the flier was also the creeper;

For when my wings were spread in the
sun their shadow upon the earth was a
turtle.

And I the believer was also the doubter;

For often have I put my finger
in my own wound that I might have the
greater belief in you and the greater
knowledge of you.

*****

And it is with this belief and this
knowledge that I say,

You are not enclosed within your bodies,
nor confined to houses or fields.

That which is you dwells above the
mountain and roves with the wind.

It is not a thing that crawls into
the sun for warmth or digs holes into
darkness for safety,

But a thing free, a spirit that envelops
the earth and moves in the ether.

If these be vague words, then seek not
to clear them.

Vague and nebulous is the beginning of
all things, but not their end,

And I fain would have you remember me as
a beginning.

Life, and all that lives, is conceived
in the mist and not in the crystal.

And who knows but a crystal is mist in decay?

*****

This would I have you remember in
remembering me:

That which seems most feeble and
bewildered in you is the strongest and
most determined.

Is it not your breath that has erected
and hardened the structure of your
bones?

And is it not a dream which none of you
remember having dreamt, that builded
your city and fashioned all there is in
it?

Could you but see the tides of that
breath you would cease to see all else,

And if you could hear the whispering of
the dream you would hear no other sound.

But you do not see, nor do you hear, and
it is well.

The veil that clouds your eyes shall be
lifted by the hands that wove it,

And the clay that fills your ears shall
be pierced by those fingers that kneaded
it.

And you shall see.

And you shall hear.

Yet you shall not deplore having known
blindness, nor regret having been deaf.

For in that day you shall know the
hidden purposes in all things,

And you shall bless darkness as you
would bless light.

After saying these things he looked
about him, and he saw the pilot of his
ship standing by the helm and gazing
now at the full sails and now at the
distance.

And he said:

Patient, over patient, is the captain of
my ship.

The wind blows, and restless are the
sails;

Even the rudder begs direction;

Yet quietly my captain awaits my
silence.

And these my mariners, who have heard
the choir of the greater sea, they too
have heard me patiently.

Now they shall wait no longer.

I am ready.

The stream has reached the sea, and
once more the great mother holds her son
against her breast.

*****

Fare you well, people of Orphalese.

This day has ended.

It is closing upon us even as the
water-lily upon its own tomorrow.

What was given us here we shall keep,

And if it suffices not, then again must
we come together and together stretch
our hands unto the giver.

Forget not that I shall come back to
you.

A little while, and my longing shall
gather dust and foam for another body.

A little while, a moment of rest upon
the wind, and another woman shall bear
me.

Farewell to you and the youth I have
spent with you.

It was but yesterday we met in a
dream.

You have sung to me in my
aloneness, and I of your longings have
built a tower in the sky.

But now our sleep has fled and our dream
is over, and it is no longer dawn.

The noontide is upon us and our half
waking has turned to fuller day, and we
must part.

If in the twilight of memory we should
meet once more, we shall speak again
together and you shall sing to me a
deeper song.

And if our hands should meet in another
dream we shall build another tower in
the sky.

*****

So saying he made a signal to the
seamen, and straightway they weighed
anchor and cast the ship loose from its
moorings, and they moved eastward.

And a cry came from the people as from a
single heart, and it rose into the dusk
and was carried out over the sea like a
great trumpeting.

Only Almitra was silent, gazing after
the ship until it had vanished into
the mist.

And when all the people were dispersed
she still stood alone upon the sea-wall,
remembering in her heart his saying,

“A little while, a moment of rest upon
the wind, and another woman shall bear
me.”

[Illustration: 0134]





        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PROPHET ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.




*******************************************************************************




The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Madman: His Parables and Poems
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Madman: His Parables and Poems


Author: Kahlil Gibran

Release date: May 1, 2004 [eBook #5616]
                Most recently updated: May 24, 2019

Language: English

Credits: Produced by William Fishburne


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MADMAN: HIS PARABLES AND POEMS ***




Produced by William Fishburne








The Madman

His Parables and Poems


By Kahlil Gibran





You ask me how I became a madman.  It happened thus:  One day, long
before many gods were born, I woke from a deep sleep and found all
my masks were stolen,--the seven masks I have fashioned and worn in
seven lives,--I ran maskless through the crowded streets shouting,
"Thieves, thieves, the cursed thieves."

Men and women laughed at me and some ran to their houses in fear
of me.

And when I reached the market place, a youth standing on a house-top
cried, "He is a madman."  I looked up to behold him; the sun kissed
my own naked face for the first time.  For the first time the sun
kissed my own naked face and my soul was inflamed with love for
the sun, and I wanted my masks no more.  And as if in a trance I
cried, "Blessed, blessed are the thieves who stole my masks."

Thus I became a madman.

And I have found both freedom and safety in my madness; the freedom of loneliness and the safety from being understood, for those who understand us enslave something in us.

But let me not be too proud of my safety.  Even a Thief in a jail
is safe from another thief.





God




In the ancient days, when the first quiver of speech came to my lips,
I ascended the holy mountain and spoke unto God, saying, "Master,
I am thy slave.  Thy hidden will is my law and I shall obey thee
for ever more."

But God made no answer, and like a mighty tempest passed away.

And after a thousand years I ascended the holy mountain and again
spoke unto God, saying, "Creator, I am thy creation.  Out of clay
hast thou fashioned me and to thee I owe mine all."

And God made no answer, but like a thousand swift wings passed
away.

And after a thousand years I climbed the holy mountain and spoke
unto God again, saying, "Father, I am thy son.  In pity and love
thou hast given me birth, and through love and worship I shall
inherit thy kingdom."

And God made no answer, and like the mist that veils the distant
hills he passed away.

And after a thousand years I climbed the sacred mountain and again
spoke unto God, saying, "My God, my aim and my fulfillment; I am
thy yesterday and thou are my tomorrow.  I am thy root in the earth
and thou art my flower in the sky, and together we grow before the
face of the sun."

Then God leaned over me, and in my ears whispered words of sweetness,
and even as the sea that enfoldeth a brook that runneth down to
her, he enfolded me.

And when I descended to the valleys and the plains God was there
also.





My Friend




My friend, I am not what I seem.  Seeming is but a garment I wear--a
care-woven garment that protects me from thy questionings and thee
from my negligence.

The "I" in me, my friend, dwells in the house of silence, and
therein it shall remain for ever more, unperceived, unapproachable.

I would not have thee believe in what I say nor trust in what I
do--for my words are naught but thy own thoughts in sound and my
deeds thy own hopes in action.

When thou sayest, "The wind bloweth eastward," I say, "Aye it doth
blow eastward"; for I would not have thee know that my mind doth
not dwell upon the wind but upon the sea.

Thou canst not understand my seafaring thoughts, nor would I have
thee understand.  I would be at sea alone.

When it is day with thee, my friend, it is night with me; yet even
then I speak of the noontide that dances upon the hills and of
the purple shadow that steals its way across the valley; for thou
canst not hear the songs of my darkness nor see my wings beating
against the stars--and I fain would not have thee hear or see.  I
would be with night alone.

When thou ascendest to thy Heaven I descend to my Hell--even then
thou callest to me across the unbridgeable gulf, "My companion, my
comrade," and I call back to thee, "My comrade, my companion"--for
I would not have thee see my Hell.  The flame would burn thy eyesight
and the smoke would crowd thy nostrils.  And I love my Hell too
well to have thee visit it.  I would be in Hell alone.

Thou lovest Truth and Beauty and Righteousness; and I for thy sake
say it is well and seemly to love these things.  But in my heart
I laught at thy love.  Yet I would not have thee see my laughter.
I would laugh alone.

My friend, thou art good and cautious and wise; nay, thou art
perfect--and I, too, speak with thee wisely and cautiously.  And
yet I am mad.  But I mask my madness.  I would be mad alone.

My friend, thou art not my friend, but how shall I make thee
understand?  My path is not thy path, yet together we walk, hand
in hand.





The Scarecrow




Once I said to a scarecrow, "You must be tired of standing in this
lonely field."

And he said, "The joy of scaring is a deep and lasting one, and I
never tire of it."

Said I, after a minute of thought, "It is true; for I too have
known that joy."

Said he, "Only those who are stuffed with straw can know it."

Then I left him, not knowing whether he had complimented or belittled
me.

A year passed, during which the scarecrow turned philosopher.

And when I passed by him again I saw two crows building a nest
under his hat.





The Sleep-Walkers




In the town where I was born lived a woman and her daughter, who
walked in their sleep.

One night, while silence enfolded the world, the woman and her
daughter, walking, yet asleep, met in their mist-veiled garden.

And the mother spoke, and she said:  "At last, at last, my enemy!
You by whom my youth was destroyed--who have built up your life
upon the ruins of mine!  Would I could kill you!"

And the daughter spoke, and she said:  "O hateful woman, selfish
and old!  Who stand between my freer self and me!  Who would have
my life an echo of your own faded life!  Would you were dead!"

At that moment a cock crew, and both women awoke.  The mother said
gently, "Is that you, darling?"  And the daughter answered gently,
"Yes, dear."





The Wise Dog




One day there passed by a company of cats a wise dog.

And as he came near and saw that they were very intent and heeded
him not, he stopped.

Then there arose in the midst of the company a large, grave cat and
looked upon them and said, "Brethren, pray ye; and when ye have
prayed again and yet again, nothing doubting, verily then it shall
rain mice."

And when the dog heard this he laughed in his heart and turned from
them saying, "O blind and foolish cats, has it not been written and
have I not known and my fathers before me, that that which raineth
for prayer and faith and supplication is not mice but bones."





The Two Hermits




Upon a lonely mountain, there lived two hermits who worshipped God
and loved one another.

Now these two hermits had one earthen bowl, and this was their only
possession.

One day an evil spirit entered into the heart of the older hermit
and he came to the younger and said, "It is long that we have
lived together.  The time has come for us to part.  Let us divide
our possessions."

Then the younger hermit was saddened and he said, "It grieves
me, Brother, that thou shouldst leave me.  But if thou must needs
go, so be it," and he brought the earthen bowl and gave it to him
saying, "We cannot divide it, Brother, let it be thine."

Then the older hermit said, "Charity I will not accept.  I will
take nothing but mine own.  It must be divided."

And the younger one said, "If the bowl be broken, of what use would
it be to thee or to me?  If it be thy pleasure let us rather cast
a lot."

But the older hermit said again, "I will have but justice and mine
own, and I will not trust justice and mine own to vain chance.  The
bowl must be divided."

Then the younger hermit could reason no further and he said, "If
it be indeed thy will, and if even so thou wouldst have it let us
now break the bowl."

But the face of the older hermit grew exceedingly dark, and he
cried, "O thou cursed coward, thou wouldst not fight."





On Giving and Taking




Once there lived a man who had a valley-full of needles.  And one
day the mother of Jesus came to him and said:  "Friend, my son's
garment is torn and I must needs mend it before he goeth to the
temple.  Wouldst thou not give me a needle?"

And he gave her not a needle, but he gave her a learned discourse
on Giving and Taking to carry to her son before he should go to
the temple.





The Seven Selves




In the stillest hour of the night, as I lay half asleep, my seven
selves sat together and thus conversed in whisper:

First Self:  Here, in this madman, I have dwelt all these years,
with naught to do but renew his pain by day and recreate his sorrow
by night.  I can bear my fate no longer, and now I rebel.

Second Self:  Yours is a better lot than mine, brother, for it is
given to me to be this madman's joyous self.  I laugh his laughter
and sing his happy hours, and with thrice winged feet I dance
his brighter thoughts.  It is I that would rebel against my weary
existence.

Third Self:  And what of me, the love-ridden self, the flaming brand
of wild passion and fantastic desires?  It is I the love-sick self
who would rebel against this madman.

Fourth Self:  I, amongst you all, am the most miserable, for naught
was given me but odious hatred and destructive loathing.  It is
I, the tempest-like self, the one born in the black caves of Hell,
who would protest against serving this madman.

Fifth Self:  Nay, it is I, the thinking self, the fanciful self,
the self of hunger and thirst, the one doomed to wander without
rest in search of unknown things and things not yet created; it is
I, not you, who would rebel.

Sixth Self:  And I, the working self, the pitiful labourer, who,
with patient hands, and longing eyes, fashion the days into images
and give the formless elements new and eternal forms--it is I, the
solitary one, who would rebel against this restless madman.

Seventh Self:  How strange that you all would rebel against this
man, because each and every one of you has a preordained fate to
fulfill.  Ah! could I but be like one of you, a self with a determined
lot!  But I have none, I am the do-nothing self, the one who sits
in the dumb, empty nowhere and nowhen, while you are busy re-creating
life.  Is it you or I, neighbours, who should rebel?

When the seventh self thus spake the other six selves looked with
pity upon him but said nothing more; and as the night grew deeper
one after the other went to sleep enfolded with a new and happy
submission.

But the seventh self remained watching and gazing at nothingness,
which is behind all things.





War




One night a feast was held in the palace, and there came a man and
prostrated himself before the prince, and all the feasters looked
upon him; and they saw that one of his eyes was out and that
the empty socket bled.  And the prince inquired of him, "What has
befallen you?"  And the man replied, "O prince, I am by profession
a thief, and this night, because there was no moon, I went to rob
the money-changer's shop, and as I climbed in through the window
I made a mistake and entered the weaver's shop, and in the dark I
ran into the weaver's loom and my eye was plucked out.  And now,
O prince, I ask for justice upon the weaver."

Then the prince sent for the weaver and he came, and it was decreed
that one of his eyes should be plucked out.

"O prince," said the weaver, "the decree is just.  It is right that
one of my eyes be taken.  And yet, alas! both are necessary to me
in order that I may see the two sides of the cloth that I weave.
But I have a neighbour, a cobbler, who has also two eyes, and in
his trade both eyes are not necessary."

Then the prince sent for the cobbler.  And he came.  And they took
out one of the cobbler's two eyes.

And justice was satisfied.





The Fox




A fox looked at his shadow at sunrise and said, "I will have
a camel for lunch today."  And all morning he went about looking
for camels.  But at noon he saw his shadow again--and he said, "A
mouse will do."





The Wise King




Once there ruled in the distant city of Wirani a king who was both
mighty and wise.  And he was feared for his might and loved for
his wisdom.

Now, in the heart of that city was a well, whose water was cool and
crystalline, from which all the inhabitants drank, even the king
and his courtiers; for there was no other well.

One night when all were asleep, a witch entered the city, and poured
seven drops of strange liquid into the well, and said, "From this
hour he who drinks this water shall become mad."

Next morning all the inhabitants, save the king and his lord
chamberlain, drank from the well and became mad, even as the witch
had foretold.

And during that day the people in the narrow streets and in the
market places did naught but whisper to one another, "The king is
mad.  Our king and his lord chamberlain have lost their reason.
Surely we cannot be ruled by a mad king.  We must dethrone him."

That evening the king ordered a golden goblet to be filled from the
well.  And when it was brought to him he drank deeply, and gave it
to his lord chamberlain to drink.

And there was great rejoicing in that distant city of Wirani,
because its king and its lord chamberlain had regained their reason.





Ambition




Three men met at a tavern table.  One was a weaver, another a
carpenter and the third a ploughman.

Said the weaver, "I sold a fine linen shroud today for two pieces
of gold.  Let us have all the wine we want."

"And I," said the carpenter, "I sold my best coffin.  We will have
a great roast with the wine."

"I only dug a grave," said the ploughman, "but my patron paid me
double.  Let us have honey cakes too."

And all that evening the tavern was busy, for they called often
for wine and meat and cakes.  And they were merry.

And the host rubbed his hands and smiled at his wife; for his guests
were spending freely.

When they left the moon was high, and they walked along the road
singing and shouting together.

The host and his wife stood in the tavern door and looked after
them.

"Ah!" said the wife, "these gentlemen!  So freehanded and so gay!
If only they could bring us such luck every day!  Then our son need
not be a tavern-keeper and work so hard.  We could educate him,
and he could become a priest."





The New Pleasure




Last night I invented a new pleasure, and as I was giving it the
first trial an angel and a devil came rushing toward my house.  They
met at my door and fought with each other over my newly created
pleasure; the one crying, "It is a sin!"--the other, "It is a
virtue!"





The Other Language




Three days after I was born, as I lay in my silken cradle, gazing
with astonished dismay on the new world round about me, my mother
spoke to the wet-nurse, saying, "How does my child?"

And the wet-nurse answered, "He does well, Madame, I have fed him
three times; and never before have I seen a babe so young yet so
gay."

And I was indignant; and I cried, "It is not true, mother; for
my bed is hard, and the milk I have sucked is bitter to my mouth,
and the odour of the breast is foul in my nostrils, and I am most
miserable."

But my mother did not understand, nor did the nurse; for the language
I spoke was that of the world from which I came.

And on the twenty-first day of my life, as I was being christened,
the priest said to my mother, "You should indeed by happy, Madame,
that your son was born a Christian."

And I was surprised,--and I said to the priest, "Then your mother
in Heaven should be unhappy, for you were not born a Christian."

But the priest too did not understand my language.

And after seven moons, one day a soothsayer looked at me, and he
said to my mother, "Your son will be a statesman and a great leader
of men."

But I cried out,--"That is a false prophet; for I shall be a
musician, and naught but a musician shall I be."

But even at that age my language was not understood--and great was
my astonishment.

And after three and thirty years, during which my mother, and the
nurse, and the priest have all died, (the shadow of God be upon
their spirits) the soothsayer still lives.  And yesterday I met him
near the gates of the temple; and while we were talking together
he said, "I have always known you would become a great musician.
Even in your infancy I prophesied and foretold your future."

And I believed him--for now I too have forgotten the language of
that other world.





The Pomegranate




Once when I was living in the heart of a pomegranate, I heard a seed
saying, "Someday I shall become a tree, and the wind will sing in
my branches, and the sun will dance on my leaves, and I shall be
strong and beautiful through all the seasons."

Then another seed spoke and said, "When I was as young as you, I
too held such views; but now that I can weigh and measure things,
I see that my hopes were vain."

And a third seed spoke also, "I see in us nothing that promises so
great a future."

And a fourth said, "But what a mockery our life would be, without
a greater future!"

Said a fifth, "Why dispute what we shall be, when we know not even
what we are."

But a sixth replied, "Whatever we are, that we shall continue to
be."

And a seventh said, "I have such a clear idea how everything will
be, but I cannot put it into words."

Then an eight spoke--and a ninth--and a tenth--and then many--until
all were speaking, and I could distinguish nothing for the many
voices.

And so I moved that very day into the heart of a quince, where the
seeds are few and almost silent.





The Two Cages




In my father's garden there are two cages.  In one is a lion, which
my father's slaves brought from the desert of Ninavah; in the other
is a songless sparrow.

Every day at dawn the sparrow calls to the lion, "Good morrow to
thee, brother prisoner."





The Three Ants




Three ants met on the nose of a man who was asleep in the sun.  And
after they had saluted one another, each according to the custom
of his tribe, they stood there conversing.

The first ant said, "These hills and plains are the most barren I
have known.  I have searched all day for a grain of some sort, and
there is none to be found."

Said the second ant, "I too have found nothing, though I have
visited every nook and glade.  This is, I believe, what my people
call the soft, moving land where nothing grows."

Then the third ant raised his head and said, "My friends, we are
standing now on the nose of the Supreme Ant, the mighty and infinite
Ant, whose body is so great that we cannot see it, whose shadow
is so vast that we cannot trace it, whose voice is so loud that we
cannot hear it; and He is omnipresent."

When the third ant spoke thus the other ants looked at each other
and laughed.

At that moment the man moved and in his sleep raised his hand and
scratched his nose, and the three ants were crushed.





The Grave-Digger




Once, as I was burying one of my dead selves, the grave-digger came
by and said to me, "Of all those who come here to bury, you alone
I like."

Said I, "You please me exceedingly, but why do you like me?"

"Because," said he, "They come weeping and go weeping--you only
come laughing and go laughing."





On the Steps of the Temple




Yestereve, on the marble steps of the Temple, I saw a woman sitting
between two men.  One side of her face was pale, the other was
blushing.





The Blessed City




In my youth I was told that in a certain city every one lived
according to the Scriptures.

And I said, "I will seek that city and the blessedness thereof."
And it was far.  And I made great provision for my journey.  And
after forty days I beheld the city and on the forty-first day I
entered into it.

And lo! the whole company of the inhabitants had each but a single
eye and but one hand.  And I was astonished and said to myself,
"Shall they of this so holy city have but one eye and one hand?"

Then I saw that they too were astonished, for they were marveling
greatly at my two hands and my two eyes.  And as they were speaking
together I inquired of them saying, "Is this indeed the Blessed
City, where each man lives according to the Scriptures?"  And they
said, "Yes, this is that city."

"And what," said I, "hath befallen you, and where are your right
eyes and your right hands?"

And all the people were moved.  And they said, "Come thou and see."

And they took me to the temple in the midst of the city.  And in
the temple I saw a heap of hands and eyes.  All withered.  Then said
I, "Alas! what conqueror hath committed this cruelty upon you?"

And there went a murmur amongst them.  And one of their elders
stood forth and said, "This doing is of ourselves.  God hath made
us conquerors over the evil that was in us."

And he led me to a high altar, and all the people followed.  And
he showed me above the altar an inscription graven, and I read:


"If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee;
for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish,
and not that the whole body should be cast into hell.  And if thy
right hand offend thee, cut it off and cast it from thee; for it
is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and
not that thy whole body should be cast into hell."


Then I understood.  And I turned about to all the people and cried,
"Hath no man or woman among you two eyes or two hands?"

And they answered me saying, "No, not one.  There is none whole save
such as are yet too young to read the Scripture and to understand
its commandment."

And when we had come out of the temple, I straightway left that
Blessed City; for I was not too young, and I could read the scripture.





The Good God and the Evil God




The Good God and the Evil God met on the mountain top.

The Good God said, "Good day to you, brother."

The Evil God did not answer.

And the Good God said, "You are in a bad humour today."

"Yes," said the Evil God, "for of late I have been often mistaken
for you, called by your name, and treated as if I were you, and it
ill-pleases me."

And the Good God said, "But I too have been mistaken for you and
called by your name."

The Evil God walked away cursing the stupidity of man.





Defeat




Defeat, my Defeat, my solitude and my aloofness;
You are dearer to me than a thousand triumphs,
And sweeter to my heart than all world-glory.

Defeat, my Defeat, my self-knowledge and my defiance,
Through you I know that I am yet young and swift of foot
And not to be trapped by withering laurels.
And in you I have found aloneness
And the joy of being shunned and scorned.

Defeat, my Defeat, my shining sword and shield,
In your eyes I have read
That to be enthroned is to be enslaved,
And to be understood is to be leveled down,
And to be grasped is but to reach one's fullness
And like a ripe fruit to fall and be consumed.

Defeat, my Defeat, my bold companion,
You shall hear my songs and my cries and my silences,
And none but you shall speak to me of the beating of wings,
And urging of seas,
And of mountains that burn in the night,
And you alone shall climb my steep and rocky soul.

Defeat, my Defeat, my deathless courage,
You and I shall laugh together with the storm,
And together we shall dig graves for all that die in us,
And we shall stand in the sun with a will,
And we shall be dangerous.





Night and the Madman




"I am like thee, O, Night, dark and naked; I walk on the flaming
path which is above my day-dreams, and whenever my foot touches
earth a giant oak tree comes forth."

"Nay, thou art not like me, O, Madman, for thou still lookest
backward to see how large a foot-print thou leavest on the sand."

"I am like thee, O, Night, silent and deep; and in the heart of
my loneliness lies a Goddess in child-bed; and in him who is being
born Heaven touches Hell."

"Nay, thou art not like me, O, Madman, for thou shudderest yet
before pain, and the song of the abyss terrifies thee."

"I am like thee, O, Night, wild and terrible; for my ears are crowded
with cries of conquered nations and sighs for forgotten lands."

"Nay, thou art not like me, O, Madman, for thou still takest thy
little-self for a comrade, and with thy monster-self thou canst
not be friend."

"I am like thee, O, Night, cruel and awful; for my bosom is lit
by burning ships at sea, and my lips are wet with blood of slain
warriors."

"Nay, thou art not like me, O, Madman; for the desire for a
sister-spirit is yet upon thee, and thou has not become alone unto
thyself."

"I am like thee, O, Night, joyous and glad; for he who dwells in
my shadow is now drunk with virgin wine, and she who follows me is
sinning mirthfully."

"Nay, thou art not like me, O, Madman, for thy soul is wrapped in
the veil of seven folds and thou holdest not thy heart in thine
hand."

"I am like thee, O, Night, patient and passionate; for in my breast
a thousand dead lovers are buried in shrouds of withered kisses."

"Yea, Madman, art thou like me?  Art thou like me?  And canst thou
ride the tempest as a steed, and grasp the lightning as a sword?"

"Like thee, O, Night, like thee, mighty and high, and my throne is
built upon heaps of fallen Gods; and before me too pass the days
to kiss the hem of my garment but never to gaze at my face."

"Art thou like me, child of my darkest heart?  And dost thou think
my untamed thoughts and speak my vast language?"

"Yea, we are twin brothers, O, Night; for thou revealest space and
I reveal my soul."





Faces




I have seen a face with a thousand countenances, and a face that
was but a single countenance as if held in a mould.


I have seen a face whose sheen I could look through to the ugliness
beneath, and a face whose sheen I had to lift to see how beautiful
it was.


I have seen an old face much lined with nothing, and a smooth face
in which all things were graven.


I know faces, because I look through the fabric my own eye weaves,
and behold the reality beneath.





The Greater Sea




My soul and I went to the great sea to bathe.  And when we reached
the shore, we went about looking for a hidden and lonely place.

But as we walked, we saw a man sitting on a grey rock taking pinches
of salt from a bag and throwing them into the sea.

"This is the pessimist," said my soul, "Let us leave this place.
We cannot bathe here."

We walked on until we reached an inlet.  There we saw, standing
on a white rock, a man holding a bejeweled box, from which he took
sugar and threw it into the sea.

"And this is the optimist," said my soul, "And he too must not see
our naked bodies."

Further on we walked.  And on a beach we saw a man picking up dead
fish and tenderly putting them back into the water.

"And we cannot bathe before him," said my soul.  "He is the humane
philanthropist."

And we passed on.

Then we came where we saw a man tracing his shadow on the sand.
Great waves came and erased it.  But he went on tracing it again
and again.

"He is the mystic," said my soul, "Let us leave him."

And we walked on, till in a quiet cover we saw a man scooping up
the foam and putting it into an alabaster bowl.

"He is the idealist," said my soul, "Surely he must not see our
nudity."

And on we walked.  Suddenly we heard a voice crying, "This is the
sea.  This is the deep sea.  This is the vast and mighty sea."
And when we reached the voice it was a man whose back was turned
to the sea, and at his ear he held a shell, listening to its murmur.

And my soul said, "Let us pass on.  He is the realist, who turns
his back on the whole he cannot grasp, and busies himself with a
fragment."

So we passed on.  And in a weedy place among the rocks was a man
with his head buried in the sand.  And I said to my soul, "We can
bath here, for he cannot see us."

"Nay," said my soul, "For he is the most deadly of them all.  He
is the puritan."

Then a great sadness came over the face of my soul, and into her
voice.

"Let us go hence," she said, "For there is no lonely, hidden place
where we can bathe.  I would not have this wind lift my golden hair,
or bare my white bosom in this air, or let the light disclose my
sacred nakedness."

Then we left that sea to seek the Greater Sea.





Crucified




I cried to men, "I would be crucified!"

And they said, "Why should your blood be upon our heads?"

And I answered, "How else shall you be exalted except by crucifying
madmen?"

And they heeded and I was crucified.  And the crucifixion appeased
me.

And when I was hanged between earth and heaven they lifted up their
heads to see me.  And they were exalted, for their heads had never
before been lifted.

But as they stood looking up at me one called out, "For what art
thou seeking to atone?"

And another cried, "In what cause dost thou sacrifice thyself?"

And a third said, "Thinkest thou with this price to buy world
glory?"

Then said a fourth, "Behold, how he smiles!  Can such pain be
forgiven?"

And I answered them all, and said:

"Remember only that I smiled.  I do not atone--nor sacrifice--nor
wish for glory; and I have nothing to forgive.  I thirsted--and I
besought you to give me my blood to drink.  For what is there can
quench a madman's thirst but his own blood?  I was dumb--and I
asked wounds of you for mouths.  I was imprisoned in your days and
nights--and I sought a door into larger days and nights.

And now I go--as others already crucified have gone.  And think not
we are weary of crucifixion.  For we must be crucified by larger
and yet larger men, between greater earths and greater heavens."





The Astronomer




In the shadow of the temple my friend and I saw a blind man sitting
alone.  And my friend said, "Behold the wisest man of our land."

Then I left my friend and approached the blind man and greeted him.
And we conversed.

After a while I said, "Forgive my question; but since when has thou
been blind?"

"From my birth," he answered.

Said I, "And what path of wisdom followest thou?"

Said he, "I am an astronomer."

Then he placed his hand upon his breast saying, "I watch all these
suns and moons and stars."





The Great Longing




Here I sit between my brother the mountain and my sister the sea.

We three are one in loneliness, and the love that binds us together
is deep and strong and strange.  Nay, it is deeper than my sister's
depth and stronger than my brother's strength, and stranger than
the strangeness of my madness.

Aeons upon aeons have passed since the first grey dawn made us
visible to one another; and though we have seen the birth and the
fullness and the death of many worlds, we are still eager and young.

We are young and eager and yet we are mateless and unvisited, and
though we lie in unbroken half embrace, we are uncomforted.  And
what comfort is there for controlled desire and unspent passion?
Whence shall come the flaming god to warm my sister's bed?  And
what she-torrent shall quench my brother's fire?  And who is the
woman that shall command my heart?

In the stillness of the night my sister murmurs in her sleep the
fire-god's unknown name, and my brother calls afar upon the cool
and distant goddess.  But upon whom I call in my sleep I know not.

*     *     *      *       *      *       *       *      *

Here I sit between my brother the mountain and my sister the sea.
We three are one in loneliness, and the love that binds us together
is deep and strong and strange.





Said a Blade of Grass




Said a blade of grass to an autumn leaf, "You make such a noise
falling!  You scatter all my winter dreams."

Said the leaf indignant, "Low-born and low-dwelling!  Songless,
peevish thing!  You live not in the upper air and you cannot tell
the sound of singing."

Then the autumn leaf lay down upon the earth and slept.  And when
spring came she waked again--and she was a blade of grass.

And when it was autumn and her winter sleep was upon her, and
above her through all the air the leaves were falling, she muttered
to herself, "O these autumn leaves!  They make such noise!  They
scatter all my winter dreams."





The Eye




Said the Eye one day, "I see beyond these valleys a mountain veiled
with blue mist.  Is it not beautiful?"

The Ear listened, and after listening intently awhile, said, "But
where is any mountain?  I do not hear it."

Then the Hand spoke and said, "I am trying in vain to feel it or
touch it, and I can find no mountain."

And the Nose said, "There is no mountain, I cannot smell it."

Then the Eye turned the other way, and they all began to talk together
about the Eye's strange delusion.  And they said, "Something must
be the matter with the Eye."





The Two Learned Men




Once there lived in the ancient city of Afkar two learned men who
hated and belittled each other's learning.  For one of them denied
the existence of the gods and the other was a believer.

One day the two met in the marketplace, and amidst their followers
they began to dispute and to argue about the existence or the
non-existence of the gods.  And after hours of contention they
parted.

That evening the unbeliever went to the temple and prostrated himself
before the altar and prayed the gods to forgive his wayward past.

And the same hour the other learned man, he who had upheld the
gods, burned his sacred books.  For he had become an unbeliever.





When My Sorrow Was Born




When my Sorrow was born I nursed it with care, and watched over it
with loving tenderness.

And my Sorrow grew like all living things, strong and beautiful
and full of wondrous delights.

And we loved one another, my Sorrow and I, and we loved the world
about us; for Sorrow had a kindly heart and mine was kindly with
Sorrow.

And when we conversed, my Sorrow and I, our days were winged and
our nights were girdled with dreams; for Sorrow had an eloquent
tongue, and mine was eloquent with Sorrow.

And when we sang together, my Sorrow and I, our neighbors sat at
their windows and listened; for our songs were deep as the sea and
our melodies were full of strange memories.

And when we walked together, my Sorrow and I, people gazed at us
with gentle eyes and whispered in words of exceeding sweetness.
And there were those who looked with envy upon us, for Sorrow was
a noble thing and I was proud with Sorrow.

But my Sorrow died, like all living things, and alone I am left to
muse and ponder.

And now when I speak my words fall heavily upon my ears.

And when I sing my songs my neighbours come not to listen.

And when I walk the streets no one looks at me.

Only in my sleep I hear voices saying in pity, "See, there lies
the man whose Sorrow is dead."





And When my Joy was Born




And when my Joy was born, I held it in my arms and stood on the
house-top shouting, "Come ye, my neighbours, come and see, for Joy
this day is born unto me.  Come and behold this gladsome thing that
laugheth in the sun."

But none of my neighbours came to look upon my Joy, and great was
my astonishment.

And every day for seven moons I proclaimed my Joy from the
house-top--and yet no one heeded me.  And my Joy and I were alone,
unsought and unvisited.

Then my Joy grew pale and weary because no other heart but mine
held its loveliness and no other lips kissed its lips.

Then my Joy died of isolation.

And now I only remember my dead Joy in remembering my dead Sorrow.
But memory is an autumn leaf that murmurs a while in the wind and
then is heard no more.





"The Perfect World"




God of lost souls, thou who are lost amongst the gods, hear me:

Gentle Destiny that watchest over us, mad, wandering spirits, hear
me:

I dwell in the midst of a perfect race, I the most imperfect.

I, a human chaos, a nebula of confused elements, I move amongst
finished worlds--peoples of complete laws and pure order, whose
thoughts are assorted, whose dreams are arranged, and whose visions
are enrolled and registered.

Their virtues, O God, are measured, their sins are weighed, and
even the countless things that pass in the dim twilight of neither
sin nor virtue are recorded and catalogued.

Here days and night are divided into seasons of conduct and governed
by rules of blameless accuracy.

To eat, to drink, to sleep, to cover one's nudity, and then to be
weary in due time.

To work, to play, to sing, to dance, and then to lie still when
the clock strikes the hour.

To think thus, to feel thus much, and then to cease thinking and
feeling when a certain star rises above yonder horizon.

To rob a neighbour with a smile, to bestow gifts with a graceful
wave of the hand, to praise prudently, to blame cautiously, to
destroy a sound with a word, to burn a body with a breath, and then
to wash the hands when the day's work is done.

To love according to an established order, to entertain one's best
self in a preconceived manner, to worship the gods becomingly,
to intrigue the devils artfully--and then to forget all as though
memory were dead.

To fancy with a motive, to contemplate with consideration, to be
happy sweetly, to suffer nobly--and then to empty the cup so that
tomorrow may fill it again.

All these things, O God, are conceived with forethought, born with
determination, nursed with exactness, governed by rules, directed
by reason, and then slain and buried after a prescribed method.
And even their silent graves that lie within the human soul are
marked and numbered.

It is a perfect world, a world of consummate excellence, a world of
supreme wonders, the ripest fruit in God's garden, the master-thought
of the universe.

But why should I be here, O God, I a green seed of unfulfilled
passion, a mad tempest that seeketh neither east nor west, a
bewildered fragment from a burnt planet?

Why am I here, O God of lost souls, thou who art lost amongst the gods?









        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MADMAN: HIS PARABLES AND POEMS ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.




*******************************************************************************




The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Forerunner, His Parables and Poems
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Forerunner, His Parables and Poems


Author: Kahlil Gibran

Release date: April 20, 2017 [eBook #54580]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Mary Glenn Krause, Chuck Greif, MFR and the
        Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
        (This file was produced from images generously made
        available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FORERUNNER, HIS PARABLES AND POEMS ***



Produced by Mary Glenn Krause, Chuck Greif, MFR and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive)











                            THE FORERUNNER
                        HIS PARABLES AND POEMS




              BOOKS BY KAHLIL GIBRAN

    “_He is the William Blake of the twentieth century._”
                --_AUGUSTE RODIN._


_THE MADMAN (1918)_

[_With three original drawings by the author._]

“His is an irresistible vigor and clarity of thought and feeling,
together with a power of simple picturing, which makes it unforgettable.
It is the voice and genius of the Arabic people.”--_The New York Evening
Post._

“Never have I read anything like it, never has a little book brought me
so deep and passionate a pleasure. He has breathed the spirit of the
East on our cold and indifferent souls; and I, for one, feel almost as
if I had been suffocated by the breath of an intense beauty.”--_The
Liberator._


_TWENTY DRAWINGS (1919)_

[_With an Introductory Essay by Alice Raphael._]

“It is Rodin that comes instantly to mind as a comparison. He has sensed
a relation between man and the universe, and, with his astounding
technique, is able to make us sense it too. Mr. Knopf is entitled to our
gratitude.”--_Detroit Journal._


_These may be had at all bookshops or from the publisher_

                            ALFRED A. KNOPF
                     220 WEST FORTY-SECOND STREET
                               NEW YORK

            [Illustration: drawing signed K. Gibran, 1920]




                          · THE FORERUNNER ·
                        HIS PARABLES AND POEMS

                                  BY
                             KAHLIL GIBRAN

                       [Illustration: colophon]

             NEW YORK       ALFRED · A · KNOPF      MCMXX

                          COPYRIGHT, 1920, BY
                             KAHLIL GIBRAN

                PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




CONTENTS


GOD’S FOOL  9

LOVE 15

THE KING-HERMIT 17

THE LION’S DAUGHTER 22

TYRANNY 26

THE SAINT 27

THE PLUTOCRAT 29

THE GREATER SELF 30

WAR AND THE SMALL NATIONS 32

CRITICS 33

POETS 35

THE WEATHER-COCK 37

THE KING OF ARADUS 38

OUT OF MY DEEPER HEART 39

DYNASTIES 41

KNOWLEDGE AND HALF-KNOWLEDGE 44

“SAID A SHEET OF SNOW-WHITE PAPER....” 46

THE SCHOLAR AND THE POET 47

VALUES 50

OTHER SEAS 51

REPENTANCE 52

THE DYING MAN AND THE VULTURE 53

BEYOND MY SOLITUDE 55

THE LAST WATCH 57


     THE FIVE ILLUSTRATIONS
     IN THIS VOLUME ARE RE-
     PRODUCED FROM ORIGINAL
     DRAWINGS BY THE AUTHOR


You are your own forerunner, and the towers you have builded are but the
foundation of your giant-self. And that self too shall be a foundation.

And I too am my own forerunner, for the long shadow stretching before me
at sunrise shall gather under my feet at the noon hour. Yet another
sunrise shall lay another shadow before me, and that also shall be
gathered at another noon.

Always have we been our own forerunners, and always shall we be. And all
that we have gathered and shall gather shall be but seeds for fields yet
unploughed. We are the fields and the ploughmen, the gatherers and the
gathered.

When you were a wandering desire in the mist, I too was there, a
wandering desire. Then we sought one another, and out of our eagerness
dreams were born. And dreams were time limitless, and dreams were space
without measure.

And when you were a silent word upon Life’s quivering lips, I too was
there, another silent word. Then Life uttered us and we came down the
years throbbing with memories of yesterday and with longing for
tomorrow, for yesterday was death conquered and tomorrow was birth
pursued.

And now we are in God’s hands. You are a sun in His right hand and I an
earth in His left hand. Yet you are not more, shining, than I, shone
upon.

And we, sun and earth, are but the beginning of a greater sun and a
greater earth. And always shall we be the beginning.

       *       *       *       *       *

You are your own forerunner, you the stranger passing by the gate of my
garden.

And I too am my own forerunner, though I sit in the shadows of my trees
and seem motionless.




GOD’S FOOL


Once there came from the desert to the great city of Sharia a man who
was a dreamer, and he had naught but his garment and a staff.

And as he walked through the streets he gazed with awe and wonder at the
temples and towers and palaces, for the city of Sharia was of surpassing
beauty. And he spoke often to the passersby, questioning them about
their city--but they understood not his language, nor he their language.

At the noon hour he stopped before a vast inn. It was built of yellow
marble, and people were going in and coming out unhindered.

“This must be a shrine,” he said to himself, and he too went in. But
what was his surprise to find himself in a hall of great splendour and
a large company of men and women seated about many tables. They were
eating and drinking and listening to the musicians.

“Nay,” said the dreamer. “This is no worshipping. It must be a feast
given by the prince to the people, in celebration of a great event.”

At that moment a man, whom he took to be the slave of the prince,
approached him, and bade him be seated. And he was served with meat and
wine and most excellent sweets.

When he was satisfied, the dreamer rose to depart. At the door he was
stopped by a large man magnificently arrayed.

“Surely this is the prince himself,” said the dreamer in his heart, and
he bowed to him and thanked him.

Then the large man said in the language of the city:

“Sir, you have not paid for your dinner.” And the dreamer did not
understand, and again thanked him heartily. Then the large man bethought
him, and he looked more closely upon the dreamer. And he saw that he was
a stranger, clad in but a poor garment, and that indeed he had not
wherewith to pay for his meal. Then the large man clapped his hands and
called--and there came four watchmen of the city. And they listened to
the large man. Then they took the dreamer between them, and they were
two on each side of him. And the dreamer noted the ceremoniousness of
their dress and of their manner and he looked upon them with delight.

“These,” said he, “are men of distinction.”

And they walked all together until they came to the House of Judgment
and they entered.

The dreamer saw before him, seated upon a throne, a venerable man with
flowing beard, robed majestically. And he thought he was the king. And
he rejoiced to be brought before him.

Now the watchmen related to the judge, who was the venerable man, the
charge against the dreamer; and the judge appointed two advocates, one
to present the charge and the other to defend the stranger. And the
advocates rose, the one after the other, and delivered each his
argument. And the dreamer thought himself to be listening to addresses
of welcome, and his heart filled with gratitude to the king and the
prince for all that was done for him.

Then sentence was passed upon the dreamer, that upon a tablet hung about
his neck his crime should be written, and that he should ride through
the city on a naked horse, with a trumpeter and a drummer before him.
And the sentence was carried out forthwith.

Now as the dreamer rode through the city upon the naked horse, with the
trumpeter and the drummer before him, the inhabitants of the city came
running forth at the sound of the noise, and when they saw him they
laughed one and all, and the children ran after him in companies from
street to street. And the dreamer’s heart was filled with ecstasy, and
his eyes shone upon them. For to him the tablet was a sign of the king’s
blessing and the procession was in his honour.

Now as he rode, he saw among the crowd a man who was from the desert
like himself and his heart swelled with joy, and he cried out to him
with a shout:

“Friend! Friend! Where are we? What city of the heart’s desire is this?
What race of lavish hosts?--who feast the chance guest in their palaces,
whose princes companion him, whose king hangs a token upon his breast
and opens to him the hospitality of a city descended from heaven.”

And he who was also of the desert replied not. He only smiled and
slightly shook his head. And the procession passed on.

And the dreamer’s face was uplifted and his eyes were overflowing with
light.




LOVE


    They say the jackal and the mole
    Drink from the self-same stream
    Where the lion comes to drink.

    And they say the eagle and the vulture
    Dig their beaks into the same carcass,
    And are at peace, one with the other,
    In the presence of the dead thing.

    O love, whose lordly hand
    Has bridled my desires,
    And raised my hunger and my thirst
    To dignity and pride,
    Let not the strong in me and the constant
    Eat the bread or drink the wine
    That tempt my weaker self.
    Let me rather starve,
    And let my heart parch with thirst,
    And let me die and perish,
    Ere I stretch my hand
    To a cup you did not fill,
    Or a bowl you did not bless.




THE KING-HERMIT


They told me that in a forest among the mountains lives a young man in
solitude who once was a king of a vast country beyond the Two Rivers.
And they also said that he, of his own will, had left his throne and the
land of his glory and come to dwell in the wilderness.

And I said, “I would seek that man, and learn the secret of his heart;
for he who renounces a kingdom must needs be greater than a kingdom.”

On that very day I went to the forest where he dwells. And I found him
sitting under a white cypress, and in his hand a reed as if it were a
sceptre. And I greeted him even as I would greet a king.

And he turned to me and said gently, “What would you in this forest of
serenity? Seek you a lost self in the green shadows, or is it a
home-coming in your twilight?”

And I answered, “I sought but you--for I fain would know that which made
you leave a kingdom for a forest.”

And he said, “Brief is my story, for sudden was the bursting of the
bubble. It happened thus: One day as I sat at a window in my palace, my
chamberlain and an envoy from a foreign land were walking in my garden.
And as they approached my window, the lord chamberlain was speaking of
himself and saying, ‘I am like the king; I have a thirst for strong wine
and a hunger for all games of chance. And like my lord the king I have
storms of temper.’ And the lord chamberlain and the envoy disappeared
among the trees. But in a few minutes they returned, and this time the
lord chamberlain was speaking of me, and he was saying, ‘My lord the
king is like myself--a good marksman; and like me he loves music and
bathes thrice a day.’”

After a moment he added, “On the eve of that day I left my palace with
but my garment, for I would no longer be ruler over those who assume my
vices and attribute to me their virtues.”

And I said, “This is indeed a wonder, and passing strange.”

And he said, “Nay, my friend, you knocked at the gate of my silences and
received but a trifle. For who would not leave a kingdom for a forest
where the seasons sing and dance ceaselessly? Many are those who have
given their kingdom for less than solitude and the sweet fellowship of
aloneness. Countless are the eagles who descend from the upper air to
live with moles that they may know the secrets of the earth. There are
those who renounce the kingdom of dreams that they may not seem distant
from the dreamless. And those who renounce the kingdom of nakedness and
cover their souls that others may not be ashamed in beholding truth
uncovered and beauty unveiled. And greater yet than all of these is he
who renounces the kingdom of sorrow that he may not seem proud and
vainglorious.”

Then rising he leaned upon his reed and said, “Go now to the great city
and sit at its gate and watch all those who enter into it and those who
go out. And see that you find him who, though born a king, is without
kingdom; and him who though ruled in flesh rules in spirit--though
neither he nor his subjects know this; and him also who but seems to
rule yet is in truth slave of his own slaves.”

After he had said these things he smiled on me, and there were a
thousand dawns upon his lips. Then he turned and walked away into the
heart of the forest.

And I returned to the city, and I sat at its gate to watch the passersby
even as he had told me. And from that day to this numberless are the
kings whose shadows have passed over me and few are the subjects over
whom my shadow has passed.




THE LION’S DAUGHTER


Four slaves stood fanning an old queen who was asleep upon her throne.
And she was snoring. And upon the queen’s lap a cat lay purring and
gazing lazily at the slaves.

The first slave spoke, and said, “How ugly this old woman is in her
sleep. See her mouth droop; and she breathes as if the devil were
choking her.”

_Then the cat said, purring, “Not half so ugly in her sleep as you in
your waking slavery.”_

And the second slave said, “You would think sleep would smooth her
wrinkles instead of deepening them. She must be dreaming of something
evil.”

_And the cat purred, “Would that you_

            [Illustration: drawing signed K. Gibran, 1920]

_might sleep also and dream of your freedom.”_

And the third slave said, “Perhaps she is seeing the procession of all
those that she has slain.”

_And the cat purred, “Aye, she sees the procession of your forefathers
and your descendants.”_

And the fourth slave said, “It is all very well to talk about her, but
it does not make me less weary of standing and fanning.”

_And the cat purred, “You shall be fanning to all eternity; for as it is
on earth so it is in heaven.”_

At this moment the old queen nodded in her sleep, and her crown fell to
the floor.

And one of the slaves said, “That is a bad omen.”

_And the cat purred, “The bad omen of one is the good omen of another.”_

And the second slave said, “What if she should wake, and find her crown
fallen! She would surely slay us.”

_And the cat purred, “Daily from your birth she has slain you and you
know it not.”_

And the third slave said, “Yes, she would slay us and she would call it
making sacrifice to the gods.”

_And the cat purred, “Only the weak are sacrificed to the gods.”_

And the fourth slave silenced the others, and softly he picked up the
crown and replaced it, without waking her, on the old queen’s head.

_And the cat purred, “Only a slave restores a crown that has fallen.”_

And after a while the old queen woke, and she looked about her and
yawned. Then she said, “Methought I dreamed, and I saw four caterpillars
chased by a scorpion around the trunk of an ancient oaktree. I like not
my dream.”

Then she closed her eyes and went to sleep again. And she snored. And
the four slaves went on fanning her.

_And the cat purred, “Fan on, fan on, stupids. You fan but the fire that
consumes you.”_




TYRANNY


Thus sings the She-Dragon that guards the seven caves by the sea:

“My mate shall come riding on the waves. His thundering roar shall fill
the earth with fear, and the flames of his nostrils shall set the sky
afire. At the eclipse of the moon we shall be wedded, and at the eclipse
of the sun I shall give birth to a Saint George, who shall slay me.”

Thus sings the She-Dragon that guards the seven caves by the sea.




THE SAINT


In my youth I once visited a saint in his silent grove beyond the hills;
and as we were conversing upon the nature of virtue a brigand came
limping wearily up the ridge. When he reached the grove he knelt down
before the saint and said, “O saint, I would be comforted! My sins are
heavy upon me.”

And the saint replied, “My sins, too, are heavy upon me.”

And the brigand said, “But I am a thief and a plunderer.”

And the saint replied, “I too am a thief and a plunderer.”

And the brigand said, “But I am a murderer, and the blood of many men
cries in my ears.”

And the saint replied, “I too am a murderer, and in my ears cries the
blood of many men.”

And the brigand said, “I have committed countless crimes.”

And the saint replied, “I too have committed crimes without number.”

Then the brigand stood up and gazed at the saint, and there was a
strange look in his eyes. And when he left us he went skipping down the
hill.

And I turned to the saint and said, “Wherefore did you accuse yourself
of uncommitted crimes? See you not that this man went away no longer
believing in you?”

And the saint answered, “It is true he no longer believes in me. But he
went away much comforted.”

At that moment we heard the brigand singing in the distance, and the
echo of his song filled the valley with gladness.




THE PLUTOCRAT


In my wanderings I once saw upon an island a man-headed, iron-hoofed
monster who ate of the earth and drank of the sea incessantly. And for a
long while I watched him. Then I approached him and said, “Have you
never enough; is your hunger never satisfied and your thirst never
quenched?”

And he answered saying, “Yes, I am satisfied, nay, I am weary of eating
and drinking; but I am afraid that tomorrow there will be no more earth
to eat and no more sea to drink.”




THE GREATER SELF


This came to pass. After the coronation of Nufsibaäl, King of Byblus, he
retired to his bed chamber--the very room which the three
hermit-magicians of the mountain had built for him. He took off his
crown and his royal raiment, and stood in the centre of the room
thinking of himself, now the all-powerful ruler of Byblus.

Suddenly he turned; and he saw stepping out of the silver mirror which
his mother had given him, a naked man.

The king was startled, and he cried out to the man, “What would you?”

And the naked man answered, “Naught but this: Why have they crowned you
king?”

And the king answered, “Because I am the noblest man in the land.”

Then the naked man said, “If you were still more noble, you would not be
king.”

And the king said, “Because I am the mightiest man in the land they
crowned me.”

And the naked man said, “If you were mightier yet, you would not be
king.”

Then the king said, “Because I am the wisest man they crowned me king.”

And the naked man said, “If you were still wiser you would not choose to
be king.”

Then the king fell to the floor and wept bitterly.

The naked man looked down upon him. Then he took up the crown and with
tenderness replaced it upon the king’s bent head.

And the naked man, gazing lovingly upon the king, entered into the
mirror.

And the king roused, and straightway he looked into the mirror. And he
saw there but himself crowned.




WAR AND THE SMALL NATIONS


Once, high above a pasture, where a sheep and a lamb were grazing, an
eagle was circling and gazing hungrily down upon the lamb. And as he was
about to descend and seize his prey, another eagle appeared and hovered
above the sheep and her young with the same hungry intent. Then the two
rivals began to fight filling the sky with their fierce cries.

The sheep looked up and was much astonished. She turned to the lamb and
said,

“How strange, my child, that these two noble birds should attack one
another. Is not the vast sky large enough for both of them? Pray, my
little one, pray in your heart that God may make peace between your
winged brothers.”

And the lamb prayed in his heart.

            [Illustration: drawing signed K. Gibran, 1920]




CRITICS


One nightfall a man travelling on horseback toward the sea reached an
inn by the roadside. He dismounted, and confident in man and night like
all riders toward the sea, he tied his horse to a tree beside the door
and entered into the inn.

At midnight, when all were asleep, a thief came and stole the
traveller’s horse.

In the morning the man awoke, and discovered that his horse was stolen.
And he grieved for his horse, and that a man had found it in his heart
to steal.

Then his fellow-lodgers came and stood around him and began to talk.

And the first man said, “How foolish of you to tie your horse outside
the stable.”

And the second said, “Still more foolish, without even hobbling the
horse!”

And the third man said, “It is stupid at best to travel to the sea on
horseback.”

And the fourth said, “Only the indolent and the slow of foot own
horses.”

Then the traveller was much astonished. At last he cried, “My friends,
because my horse is stolen, you have hastened one and all to tell me my
faults and my shortcomings. But strange, not one word of reproach have
you uttered about the man who stole my horse.”




POETS


Four poets were sitting around a bowl of punch that stood on a table.

Said the first poet, “Methinks I see with my third eye the fragrance of
this wine hovering in space like a cloud of birds in an enchanted
forest.”

The second poet raised his head and said, “With my inner ear I can hear
those mist-birds singing. And the melody holds my heart as the white
rose imprisons the bee within her petals.”

The third poet closed his eyes and stretched his arm upward, and said,
“I touch them with my hand. I feel their wings, like the breath of a
sleeping fairy, brushing against my fingers.”

Then the fourth poet rose and lifted up the bowl, and he said, “Alas,
friends! I am too dull of sight and of hearing and of touch. I cannot
see the fragrance of this wine, nor hear its song, nor feel the beating
of its wings. I perceive but the wine itself. Now therefore must I drink
it, that it may sharpen my senses and raise me to your blissful
heights.”

And putting the bowl to his lips, he drank the punch to the very last
drop.

The three poets, with their mouths open, looked at him aghast, and there
was a thirsty yet unlyrical hatred in their eyes.




THE WEATHER-COCK


Said the weather-cock to the wind, “How tedious and monotonous you are!
Can you not blow any other way but in my face? You disturb my God-given
stability.”

And the wind did not answer. It only laughed in space.




THE KING OF ARADUS


Once the elders of the city of Aradus presented themselves before the
king, and besought of him a decree to forbid to men all wine and all
intoxicants within their city.

And the king turned his back upon them and went out from them laughing.

Then the elders departed in dismay.

At the door of the palace they met the lord chamberlain. And the lord
chamberlain observed that they were troubled, and he understood their
case.

Then he said, “Pity, my friends! Had you found the king drunk, surely he
would have granted you your petition.”




OUT OF MY DEEPER HEART


Out of my deeper heart a bird rose and flew skyward.

Higher and higher did it rise, yet larger and larger did it grow.

At first it was but like a swallow, then a lark, then an eagle, then as
vast as a spring cloud, and then it filled the starry heavens.

Out of my heart a bird flew skyward. And it waxed larger as it flew. Yet
it left not my heart.

       *       *       *       *       *

O my faith, my untamed knowledge, how shall I fly to your height and see
with you man’s larger self pencilled upon the sky?

How shall I turn this sea within me into mist, and move with you in
space immeasurable?

How can a prisoner within the temple behold its golden domes?

How shall the heart of a fruit be stretched to envelop the fruit also?

O my faith, I am in chains behind these bars of silver and ebony, and I
cannot fly with you.

Yet out of my heart you rise skyward, and it is my heart that holds you,
and I shall be content.

            [Illustration: drawing signed K. Gibran, 1920]




DYNASTIES


The Queen of Ishana was in travail of childbirth; and the King and the
mighty men of his court were waiting in breathless anxiety in the great
hall of the Winged Bulls.

At eventide there came suddenly a messenger in haste and prostrated
himself before the King, and said, “I bring glad tidings unto my lord
the King, and unto the kingdom and the slaves of the King. Mihrab the
Cruel, thy life-long enemy, the King of Bethroun, is dead.”

When the King and the mighty men heard this, they all rose and shouted
for joy; for the powerful Mihrab, had he lived longer, had assuredly
overcome Ishana and carried the inhabitants captive.

At this moment the court physician also entered the hall of Winged
Bulls, and behind him came the royal midwives. And the physician
prostrated himself before the king, and said, “My lord the King shall
live for ever, and through countless generations shall he rule over the
people of Ishana. For unto thee, O King, is born this very hour a son,
who shall be thy heir.”

Then indeed was the soul of the King intoxicated with joy, that in the
same moment his foe was dead and the royal line was established.

Now in the City of Ishana lived a true prophet. And the prophet was
young, and bold of spirit. And the King that very night ordered that the
prophet should be brought before him. And when he was brought, the King
said unto him, “Prophesy now, and foretell what shall be the future of
my son who is this day born unto the kingdom.”

And the prophet hesitated not, but said, “Hearken, O King, and I will
indeed prophesy of the future of thy son, that is this day born. The
soul of thy enemy, even of thy enemy King Mihrab, who died yestereve,
lingered but a day upon the wind. Then it sought for itself a body to
enter into. And that which it entered into was the body of thy son that,
is born unto thee this hour.”

Then the King was enraged, and with his sword he slew the prophet.

And from that day to this, the wise men of Ishana say one to another
secretly, “Is it not known, and has it not been said from of old, that
Ishana is ruled by an enemy.”




KNOWLEDGE AND HALF-KNOWLEDGE


Four frogs sat upon a log that lay floating on the edge of a river.
Suddenly the log was caught by the current and swept slowly down the
stream. The frogs were delighted and absorbed, for never before had they
sailed.

At length the first frog spoke, and said, “This is indeed a most
marvellous log. It moves as if alive. No such log was ever known
before.”

Then the second frog spoke, and said, “Nay, my friend, the log is like
other logs, and does not move. It is the river, that is walking to the
sea, and carries us and the log with it.”

And the third frog spoke, and said, “It is neither the log nor the
river that moves. The moving is in our thinking. For without thought
nothing moves.”

And the three frogs began to wrangle about what was really moving. The
quarrel grew hotter and louder, but they could not agree.

Then they turned to the fourth frog, who up to this time had been
listening attentively but holding his peace, and they asked his opinion.

And the fourth frog said, “Each of you is right, and none of you is
wrong. The moving is in the log and the water and our thinking also.”

And the three frogs became very angry, for none of them was willing to
admit that his was not the whole truth, and that the other two were not
wholly wrong.

Then the strange thing happened. The three frogs got together and pushed
the fourth frog off the log into the river.




“SAID A SHEET OF SNOW-WHITE PAPER....”


Said a sheet of snow-white paper, “Pure was I created, and pure will I
remain for ever. I would rather be burnt and turn to white ashes than
suffer darkness to touch me or the unclean to come near me.”

The ink-bottle heard what the paper was saying, and it laughed in its
dark heart; but it never dared to approach her. And the multicoloured
pencils heard her also, and they too never came near her.

And the snow-white sheet of paper did remain pure and chaste for
ever--pure and chaste--and empty.




THE SCHOLAR AND THE POET


Said the serpent to the lark, “Thou flyest, yet thou canst not visit the
recesses of the earth where the sap of life moveth in perfect silence.”

And the lark answered, “Aye, thou knowest over much, nay thou art wiser
than all things wise--pity thou canst not fly.”

And as if he did not hear, the serpent said, “Thou canst not see the
secrets of the deep, nor move among the treasures of the hidden empire.
It was but yesterday I lay in a cave of rubies. It is like the heart of
a ripe pomegranate, and the faintest ray of light turns it into a
flame-rose. Who but me can behold such marvels?”

And the lark said, “None, none but thee can lie among the crystal
memories of the cycles: pity thou canst not sing.”

And the serpent said, “I know a plant whose root descends to the bowels
of the earth, and he who eats of that root becomes fairer than
Ashtarte.”

And the lark said, “No one, no one but thee could unveil the magic
thought of the earth--pity thou canst not fly.”

And the serpent said, “There is a purple stream that runneth under a
mountain, and he who drinketh of it shall become immortal even as the
gods. Surely no bird or beast can discover that purple stream.”

And the lark answered, “If thou willest thou canst become deathless even
as the gods--pity thou canst not sing.”

And the serpent said, “I know a buried temple, which I visit once a
moon: It was built by a forgotten race of giants, and upon its walls are
graven the secrets of time and space, and he who reads them shall
understand that which passeth all understanding.”

And the lark said, “Verily, if thou so desirest thou canst encircle with
thy pliant body all knowledge of time and space--pity thou canst not
fly.”

Then the serpent was disgusted, and as he turned and entered into his
hole he muttered, “Empty headed songster!”

And the lark flew away singing, “Pity thou canst not sing. Pity, pity,
my wise one, thou canst not fly.”




VALUES


Once a man unearthed in his field a marble statue of great beauty. And
he took it to a collector who loved all beautiful things and offered it
to him for sale, and the collector bought it for a large price. And they
parted.

And as the man walked home with his money he thought, and he said to
himself, “How much life this money means! How can any one give all this
for a dead carved stone buried and undreamed of in the earth for a
thousand years?”

And now the collector was looking at his statue, and he was thinking,
and he said to himself, “What beauty! What life! The dream of what a
soul!--and fresh with the sweet sleep of a thousand years. How can any
one give all this for money, dead and dreamless?”




OTHER SEAS


A fish said to another fish, “Above this sea of ours there is another
sea, with creatures swimming in it--and they live there even as we live
here.”

The fish replied, “Pure fancy! Pure fancy! When you know that everything
that leaves our sea by even an inch, and stays out of it, dies. What
proof have you of other lives in other seas?”




REPENTANCE


On a moonless night a man entered into his neighbour’s garden and stole
the largest melon he could find and brought it home.

He opened it and found it still unripe.

Then behold a marvel!

The man’s conscience woke and smote him with remorse; and he repented
having stolen the melon.

            [Illustration: drawing signed K. Gibran, 1920]




          THE DYING MAN AND THE VULTURE


    Wait, wait yet awhile, my eager friend.
    I shall yield but too soon this wasted thing,
    Whose agony overwrought and useless
    Exhausts your patience.
    I would not have your honest hunger
    Wait upon these moments:
    But this chain, though made of a breath,
    Is hard to break.
    And the will to die,
    Stronger than all things strong,
    Is stayed by a will to live
    Feebler than all things feeble.
    Forgive me comrade; I tarry too long.
    It is memory that holds my spirit;
    A procession of distant days,
    A vision of youth spent in a dream,
    A face that bids my eyelids not to sleep,
    A voice that lingers in my ears,
    A hand that touches my hand.
    Forgive me that you have waited too long.
    It is over now, and all is faded:--
    The face, the voice, the hand and the mist
    that brought them hither.
    The knot is untied.
    The cord is cleaved.
    And that which is neither food nor drink is withdrawn.
    Approach, my hungry comrade;
    The board is made ready,
    And the fare, frugal and spare,
    Is given with love.
    Come, and dig your beak here, into the left side,
    And tear out of its cage this smaller bird,
    Whose wings can beat no more:
    I would have it soar with you into the sky.
    Come now, my friend, I am your host tonight,
    And you my welcome guest.




BEYOND MY SOLITUDE


Beyond my solitude is another solitude, and to him who dwells therein my
aloneness is a crowded market-place and my silence a confusion of
sounds.

Too young am I and too restless to seek that above-solitude. The voices
of yonder valley still hold my ears, and its shadows bar my way and I
cannot go.

Beyond these hills is a grove of enchantment and to him who dwells
therein my peace is but a whirlwind and my enchantment an illusion.

Too young am I and too riotous to seek that sacred grove. The taste of
blood is clinging in my mouth, and the bow and the arrows of my fathers
yet linger in my hand and I cannot go.

Beyond this burdened self lives my freer self; and to him my dreams are
a battle fought in twilight and my desires the rattling of bones.

Too young am I and too outraged to be my freer self.

And how shall I become my freer self unless I slay my burdened selves,
or unless all men become free?

How shall my leaves fly singing upon the wind unless my roots shall
wither in the dark?

How shall the eagle in me soar against the sun until my fledglings leave
the nest which I with my own beak have built for them?




THE LAST WATCH


At the high-tide of night, when the first breath of dawn came upon the
wind, the Forerunner, he who calls himself echo to a voice yet unheard,
left his bed-chamber and ascended to the roof of his house. Long he
stood and looked down upon the slumbering city. Then he raised his head,
and even as if the sleepless spirits of all those asleep had gathered
around him, he opened his lips and spoke, and he said:

“My friends and my neighbours and you who daily pass my gate, I would
speak to you in your sleep, and in the valley of your dreams I would
walk naked and unrestrained; far heedless are your waking hours and deaf
are your sound-burdened ears.

“Long did I love you and overmuch.

“I love the one among you as though he were all, and all as if you were
one. And in the spring of my heart I sang in your gardens, and in the
summer of my heart I watched at your threshing-floors.

“Yea, I loved you all, the giant and the pigmy, the leper and the
anointed, and him who gropes in the dark even as him who dances his days
upon the mountains.

“You, the strong, have I loved, though the marks of your iron hoofs are
yet upon my flesh; and you the weak, though you have drained my faith
and wasted my patience.

“You the rich have I loved, while bitter was your honey to my mouth; and
you the poor, though you knew my empty-handed shame.

“You the poet with the barrowed lute and blind fingers, you have I loved
in self indulgence; and you the scholar, ever gathering rotted shrouds
in potters’ fields.

“You the priest I have loved, who sit in the silences of yesterday
questioning the fate of my tomorrow; and you the worshippers of gods the
images of your own desires.

“You the thirsting woman whose cup is ever full, I have loved you in
understanding; and you the woman of restless nights, you too I have
loved in pity.

“You the talkative have I loved, saying, ‘Life hath much to say’; and
you the dumb have I loved, whispering to myself, ‘Says he not in silence
that which I fain would hear in words?’

“And you the judge and the critic, I have loved also; yet when you have
seen me crucified, you said, ‘He bleeds rhythmically, and the pattern
his blood makes upon his white skin is beautiful to behold.’

“Yea, I have loved you all, the young and the old, the trembling reed
and the oak.

“But alas! it was the over-abundance of my heart that turned you from
me. You would drink love from a cup, but not from a surging river. You
would hear love’s faint murmur, but when love shouts you would muffle
your ears.

“And because I have loved you all you have said, ‘Too soft and yielding
is his heart, and too undiscerning is his path. It is the love of a
needy one, who picks crumbs even as he sits at kingly feasts. And it is
the love of a weakling, for the strong loves only the strong.’

“And because I have loved you overmuch you have said, ‘It is but the
love of a blind man who knows not the beauty of one nor the ugliness of
another. And it is the love of the tasteless who drinks vinegar even as
wine. And it is the love of the impertinent and the overweening, for
what stranger could be our mother and father and sister and brother?’

“This you have said, and more. For often in the marketplace you pointed
your fingers at me and said mockingly, ‘There goes the ageless one, the
man without seasons, who at the noon hour plays games with our children
and at eventide sits with our elders and assumes wisdom and
understanding.’

“And I said ‘I will love them more. Aye, even more. I will hide my love
with seeming to hate, and disguise my tenderness as bitterness. I will
wear an iron mask, and only when armed and mailed shall I seek them.’

“Then I laid a heavy hand upon your bruises, and like a tempest in the
night I thundered in your ears.

“From the housetop I proclaimed you hypocrites, pharisees, tricksters,
false and empty earth-bubbles.

“The short-sighted among you I cursed for blind bats, and those too near
the earth I likened to soulless moles.

“The eloquent I pronounced fork-tongued, the silent, stone-lipped, and
the simple and artless I called the dead never weary of death.

“The seekers after world knowledge I condemned as offenders of the holy
spirit and those who would naught but the spirit I branded as hunters of
shadows who cast their nets in flat waters and catch but their own
images.

“Thus with my lips have I denounced you, while my heart, bleeding within
me, called you tender names.

“It was love lashed by its own self that spoke. It was pride half slain
that fluttered in the dust. It was my hunger for your love that raged
from the housetop, while my own love, kneeling in silence, prayed your
forgiveness.

“But behold a miracle!

“It was my disguise that opened your eyes, and my seeming to hate that
woke your hearts.

“And now you love me.

“You love the swords that strike you and the arrows that crave your
breast. For it comforts you to be wounded and only when you drink of
your own blood can you be intoxicated.

“Like moths that seek destruction in the flame you gather daily in my
garden: and with faces uplifted and eyes enchanted you watch me tear the
fabric of your days. And in whispers you say the one to the other, ‘He
sees with the light of God. He speaks like the prophets of old. He
unveils our souls and unlocks our hearts, and like the eagle that knows
the way of foxes he knows our ways.’

“Aye, in truth, I know your ways, but only as an eagle knows the ways of
his fledglings. And I fain would disclose my secret. Yet in my need for
your nearness I feign remoteness, and in fear of the ebbtide of your
love I guard the floodgates of my love.”

After saying these things the Forerunner covered his face with his hands
and wept bitterly. For he knew in his heart that love humiliated in its
nakedness is greater than love that seeks triumph in disguise; and he
was ashamed.

But suddenly he raised his head, and like one waking from sleep he
outstretched his arms and said, “Night is over, and we children of night
must die when dawn comes leaping upon the hills; and out of our ashes a
mightier love shall rise. And it shall laugh in the sun, and it shall be
deathless.”








        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FORERUNNER, HIS PARABLES AND POEMS ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.



